	Leslie Nielsen
 
 
Leslie William Nielsen, OC (11 February 1926 28 November 2010)    was a Canadian and naturalized American actor and comedian.     Nielsen appeared in more than one hundred films and 1,500 television programs over the span of his career, portraying more than 220 characters.    Born in Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada, Nielsen enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and worked as a disc jockey before receiving a scholarship to Neighborhood Playhouse. Making his television debut in 1948, he quickly expanded to over 50 television appearances two years later. Nielsen made his film debut in 1956, and began collecting his roles in dramas, westerns, and romance films between the 1950s and the 1970s. Nielsen's performance in the films Forbidden Planet and The Poseidon Adventure received positive reviews as a serious actor, although he is primarily known for his comedic roles during the 1980s and the early 1990s.Although Nielsen's acting career crossed a variety of genres in both television and films, his deadpan delivery in Airplane! marked a turning point in his career, one that would make him, in the words of film critic Roger Ebert, "the Olivier of spoofs."    Nielsen enjoyed further success with The Naked Gun film series, based on an earlier short-lived television series Police Squad! in which he also starred. Nielsen's portrayal of comedic characters seemingly oblivious to (and complicit in) their absurd surroundings gave him a reputation as a comedian.    In the final years of his life, Nielsen appeared in numerous spoof and parody films, many of which were met poorly by critics, but performed well in box office and home media releases. Nielsen married four times and had two daughters from his second marriage. Nielsen was recognized with a variety of awards throughout his career, and was inducted into the Canada and Hollywood Walks of Fame.
Early life
Nielsen was born on 11 February 1926 in Regina, Saskatchewan.    His mother, Mabel Elizabeth (née Davies), was a Welsh immigrant, and his father, Ingvard Eversen Nielsen, was a Danish-born Constable in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.         Nielsen had two brothers; his older brother, Erik Nielsen (1924–2008), was Deputy Prime Minister of Canada from 1984 to 1986.  Ingvard was a troubled man who beat his wife and sons, and Leslie longed to escape. As soon as he graduated from high school at 17, he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force, even though he was legally deaf (he wore hearing aids most of his life).    His half-uncle, Jean Hersholt, was an actor best known for his portrayal of Dr. Christian in the long-running radio series of the same name and the subsequent television series and films.     In a 1994 Boston Globe article, Nielsen explained, "I did learn very early that when I would mention my uncle, people would look at me as if I were the biggest liar in the world. Then I would take them home and show them 8-by-10 glossies, and things changed quite drastically. So I began to think that maybe this acting business was not a bad idea, much as I was very shy about it and certainly without courage regarding it. My uncle died not too long after I was in a position to know him. I regret that I had not a chance to know him better." Nielsen spent several years living in Fort Norman (now Tulita), Northwest Territories where his father was stationed with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.       At the age of 17, following his graduation from Victoria Composite High School in Edmonton, Nielsen enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and was trained as an aerial gunner during the latter part of World War II (but was too young to be fully trained or sent overseas).    He worked briefly as a disc jockey at a Calgary, Alberta radio station, before enrolling at the Lorne Greene Academy of Radio Arts, Toronto.     While studying in Toronto, Nielsen received a scholarship to the Neighborhood Playhouse. He noted, "I couldn't refuse, but I must say when you come from the land of the snow goose, the moose and wool to New York, you're bringing every ton of hayseed and country bumpkin that you packed. As long as I didn't open my mouth, I felt a certain security. But I always thought I was going to be unmasked: 'OK, pack your stuff.' 'Well, what's the matter?' 'We've discovered you have no talent; we're shipping you back to Canada.'"  He moved to New York City for his scholarship,  studying theater and music at the Neighborhood Playhouse, while performing in summer stock theatre.  Afterward, he attended the Actors Studio,    until making his first television appearance in 1948 on an episode of Studio One, alongside Charlton Heston,    for which he was paid US$75. 
Career
Early career 
Nielsen's career began in dramatic roles on television during what is known as "Television's Golden Age",  appearing in almost 50 live programs in 1950 alone.  Nielsen reported that for his salary that there "  was very little gold, we only got $75 or $100 per show."    His distinctive voice narrated several documentaries and commercials but, with a handful of exceptions, his early work as a dramatic actor was uneventful.  Hal Erickson of Allmovie noted, "...much of Nielsen's early work was undistinguished; he was merely a handsome leading man in an industry overstocked with handsome leading men."    In 1956 he made his feature film debut in the Michael Curtiz-directed musical film The Vagabond King.  In the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Nielsen pointed out that he remembers Curtiz as "a sadist, a charming sadist, but a sadist".  Nielsen would go on to call this film "The Vagabond Turkey".  Though the film was not a box office success, Nielsen caught the eye of producer Nicholas Nayfack who offered him an audition for a role in the science fiction film Forbidden Planet, resulting in Nielsen being signed to a long-term contract by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM).  
Forbidden Planet became an instant success,    and roles in other MGM films such as Ransom! (1956), The Opposite Sex (1956) and Hot Summer Night (1957) followed.  In 1957 he won the lead role opposite Debbie Reynolds in the romantic comedy Tammy and the Bachelor, which, as a Chicago Tribune critic wrote in 1998, made people consider Nielsen as both a dramatic actor and a handsome romantic lead.  However, dissatisfied with the quality of the films he was offered, calling the studios "  a Tiffany, which had forgotten how to make silver", Nielsen left MGM, but not before auditioning for the role of Messala in the 1959 historical piece Ben-Hur. Stephen Boyd was eventually given the role.     After leaving the studios, Nielsen landed the lead role in the Disney miniseries The Swamp Fox, as American Revolutionary War hero Francis Marion.  In a 1988 interview he reflected on the series, stating, "That was a great experience, because the Disney people didn't do their shows like everyone else, knocking out an episode a week.   We only had to do an episode a month, and the budgets were extremely high for TV at that time. We had location shooting rather than cheap studio backdrops, and very authentic costumes."  Eight episodes were produced and aired between 1959 and 1961.   His television appearances include parts in Justice, Alfred Hitchcock Presents, The Virginian, and The Wild Wild West. In 1961, he was the lead in a taut Los Angeles police drama called The New Breed. He guest starred in a 1964 episode of Daniel Boone with Fess Parker and, in a minor but credited role, Jay Silverheels. In 1968, he had a major role in the pilot film for the popular police series Hawaii Five-O, and later appeared in one of the seventh season episodes. In 1969, he had the leading role as a police officer in The Bold Ones: The Protectors.In 1972, Nielsen appeared as the ship's captain in the all-star disaster epic The Poseidon Adventure. He also starred in the William Girdler-directed 1977 action film Project: Kill. His last dramatic role before portraying mainly comedy roles was the 1979 Canadian disaster film City on Fire in which he played a corrupt mayor. In 1980, he guest starred as Sinclair on the CBS miniseries The Chisholms.
Airplane! and The Naked Gun 
Nielsen's supporting role in 1980's Airplane! was a major watershed in his career. The ethos of the movie, a parody of dramatic disaster films such as Zero Hour! and Airport, is largely based on building a comedy around actors who were then known exclusively for their dramatic roles (other stars included Robert Stack, Peter Graves, and Lloyd Bridges). Nielsen was the movie's linchpin, his deadpan delivery contrasting with the continual absurdity surrounding him. When asked, "Surely you can't be serious?", he responds with a curt, "I am serious. And don't call me Shirley." In several interviews he later reflected on the significance of the comedic line: "I thought it was amusing, but it never occurred to me that it was going to become a trademark. It's such a surprise...the thing comes out, people say, 'What did he say?!'"    Nielsen also stated that he was "...pleased and honored that [he] had a chance to deliver that line."  The comedic exchange was at #79 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.    The American Film Institute also included the film in its list of the top ten comedy films of all time.   
Critics praised the film, which also proved to be a success with audiences.    The film's directors, Jim Abrahams, David Zucker, and Jerry Zucker, chose Nielsen for the role based on his ability to play "a fish in water", stating that "You could have cast funny people and done it with everybody winking, goofing off, and silly...we wanted people to be oblivious to the comedy."  For Nielsen, Airplane! marked a shift from dramatic roles to a new focus on deadpan comedy. When it was suggested that his role in Airplane! was against type, Nielsen protested that he had "always been cast against type before," and that comedy was what he always really wanted to do.   The directors, interested in the success of the new comedy, decided to bring a similar style of comedy to television, casting Nielsen in the lead role in their new series, Police Squad!. The series introduced Nielsen as Frank Drebin, the stereotypical police officer modeled after serious characters in earlier police TV series.Police Squads opening sequence was based on the 1950s cop show M Squad, (which starred Lee Marvin), which opened with footage of a police car roving through an after-dark urban setting with a big band playing a jazz theme song in the background. The voice-over and the show's organization into "acts" with an epilogue was homage to Quinn Martin police dramas including The Fugitive, The Streets of San Francisco, Barnaby Jones, The F.B.I., and Cannon. Much like in Airplane!, Nielsen portrayed a serious character whose one-liners appeared accidental next to the pratfalls and sight gags around him. Although the show was quickly canceled, lasting only six episodes after being juggled between time slots, Nielsen received an Emmy Award  nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series.   Non-comedic roles included Prom Night (1980) and Creepshow (1982), both horror films. His last dramatic role was as Allen Green, a violent john killed in self-defense by Barbra Streisand's prostitute character, Claudia Draper, in Martin Ritt's courtroom drama Nuts (1987).Six years after the cancellation of Police Squad!, its directors decided to make a feature length version for theaters. Titled The Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!. The film returned Nielsen to his role as Frank Drebin. It involved a comical scheme of a ruthless drug kingpin using hypnosis in an attempt to assassinate Queen Elizabeth II. Drebin, like the doctor in Airplane!, seemed unaware of the absurdity around him even when unintentionally contributing toward it. Nielsen later said in an interview that he had done many of his own stunts, "You have an idea of how you're going to do something, and it's your vision... unless you do it, it really doesn't stand a chance."  This movie grossed over $78 million at the box office and was well received by critics.       Ebert's 3½–star review (out of four) noted, "You laugh, and then you laugh at yourself for laughing."   The Naked Gun spawned two sequels: The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear (1991) and Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult (1994). Naked Gun 2½ grossed more than the original, with $86,930,400, while Naked Gun 33⅓ grossed $51,132,600 in receipts.       Nielsen remained open to the prospects of acting in a fourth Naked Gun film, although he doubted that it would ever be produced—"I don't think so," he said in 2005. "If there hasn't been one by now, I doubt it. I think it would be wonderful."   Nielsen briefly appeared on the World Wrestling Federation program in the summer of 1994 on WWF Monday Night Raw; capitalizing on his Frank Drebin character, Nielsen (and George Kennedy) were hired as "super-sleuths" to unravel the mystery of The Undertaker who had disappeared at January's Royal Rumble event. At SummerSlam 1994, in a Naked Gun parody, they were hot on the case (in fact, they were literally standing on a case). Although they did not actually find The Undertaker, the case had been closed (the literal case had been shut) and thus, they solved the mystery.   
Later comediesNielsen attempted a variety of similar roles with none achieving the prominence of Frank Drebin. These films mostly emulated the style of The Naked Gun series with varying degrees of critical and commercial success: many were panned by critics and most performed poorly. In 1986, Nielsen played against recent type as a dramatic (and unsympathetic) character in the comedy, Soul Man. In 1990, Nielsen also appeared as a Frank Drebin-style character in a series of advertisements in the United Kingdom for Red Rock Cider.Although The Naked Gun series parodied police dramas in general, Nielsen's later parody films focused on specific targets. Critics panned Repossessed (1990) and 2001: A Space Travesty (2001), parodies of The Exorcist and 2001: A Space Odyssey, respectively. Both films attempted the absurdist comedy Nielsen is recognized for, but were poorly received.       Even a leading role in a Mel Brooks comic horror parody, Dracula: Dead and Loving It, failed to generate much box office excitement, although it did gain somewhat of a following on its later release to video. Both 1996's Spy Hard and 1998's Wrongfully Accused, a parody of James Bond films and The Fugitive, respectively, received more popularity on home video but were not well received by critics.      His attempt at children's comedies met with additional criticism. Surf Ninjas (1993) and Mr. Magoo (1997) faced scathing reviews. Several critics were disappointed that Nielsen's role in Surf Ninjas was only "an extended cameo" and film critic Chris Hicks recommended that viewers "...avoid any comedy that features Leslie Nielsen outside of the Naked Gun series."       Jeff Miller of the Houston Chronicle panned Mr. Magoo, a live action remake of the 1950s cartoon, by saying, "I'm supposed to suggest how the film might be better but I can't think of anything to say other than to make the film again."   Nielsen's first major slapstick success since The Naked Gun came in a supporting role in Scary Movie 3 (2003). His appearance as President Harris proved popular enough for a second appearance in its sequel, Scary Movie 4 (2006). This became the first time Nielsen reprised a character since his appearances as Frank Drebin. In one scene, Nielsen appeared almost fully nude, and one critic referred to the scene as putting "the 'scary' in Scary Movie 4."   Nielsen also hosted a series of instructional golf videos beginning with 1993's Bad Golf Made Easier. The videos were not serious, instead combining absurdist comedy with golf techniques. The series were popular enough to spawn two additional sequels, Bad Golf My Way (1994) and Stupid Little Golf Video (1997). Nielsen also co-wrote a fictional autobiography titled The Naked Truth. The book portrayed Nielsen as a popular actor with a long history of prestigious films.
Final years
Even in his eighties, Nielsen continued to have an active career. He performed serious roles on screen and stage (such as his one-man theatre show Darrow, in which he played Clarence Darrow), as well as providing voice-overs and on-camera appearances for commercials; cartoons like Zeroman where he had the leading role/voice; children's shows, such as Pumper Pups, which he narrated, in addition to comedic film roles. The sibling relationship with his elder brother, the Honourable Erik Nielsen, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, served as the premise of an HBO mockumentary entitled The Canadian Conspiracy in which Leslie Nielsen appeared, along with other prominent Canadian-born media personalities. He was a celebrity contestant on CBS's Gameshow Marathon, where he played The Price Is Right, Let's Make a Deal, Beat the Clock, and Press Your Luck for charity. Beginning in February 2007, Nielsen began playing a small role as a doctor in the humorous yet educational television show Doctor*Ology. The show chronicles real-life medical techniques and technology, and airs on the Discovery Channel. In an interview, Nielsen admitted his admiration for the doctors on the show: "There are any number of things that you think about when you ponder if you hadn't been an actor, what would you be, and I've always said I'd like to be an astronaut or a doctor. I have such admiration for doctors. I just don't know how you go around to thank them enough for coming up with the world's most remarkable new discoveries."   In 2007, Nielsen starred in the drama Music Within. In 2008, he portrayed a version of Uncle Ben for Superhero Movie, a spoof of superhero films. He then appeared in the 2008 parody film An American Carol, which David Zucker directed, produced, and co-wrote. He appeared in the 2009 parody Stan Helsing. Nielsen portrayed the Doctor in the Spanish horror comedy Spanish Movie,  a spoof comedy like Scary Movie, but making fun of popular Spanish films. Nielsen appeared in over 100 films and 1,500 television programs over the span of his career, portraying over 220 characters.      
Personal life Nielsen married four times: Monica Boyar (1950–1956), Alisande Ullman (1958–1973), Brooks Oliver (1981–1983) and Barbaree Earl (2001–2010).       Nielsen had two daughters from his second marriage, Maura and Thea Nielsen. Nielsen was a fan of golf, and he often played it in his free time.    Nielsen joked about his view on golf, "I have no goals or ambition. I do, however, wish to work enough to maintain whatever celebrity status I have so that they will continue to invite me to golf tournaments."  Nielsen's interest in the sport led him to star in several comedic instructional films.Nielsen stated in several interviews that he had a few medical problems such as hearing impairment.    He was legally deaf and wore hearing aids for most of his life.  Because of this impairment, he publicly supported the Better Hearing Institute.   
DeathIn November 2010, Nielsen was admitted to a Fort Lauderdale, Florida hospital for treatment of pneumonia. On 28 November, Doug Nielsen, Nielsen's nephew, announced to the CJOB radio station that Nielsen had died in his sleep, due to complications from pneumonia, around 5:30 pm EST, surrounded by family and friends.          He was interred in Fort Lauderdale's Evergreen Cemetery. As a final bit of humor, Nielsen chose "Let 'er Rip" as his epitaph. 
AchievementsAmong his numerous awards, in 1995 Leslie Nielsen received UCLA's Jack Benny Award for his comedic roles.  In 1988, he became the 1,884th personality to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6541 Hollywood Blvd.    In 2001 he was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame.    The following year he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, although he was also a naturalized U.S. citizen.  With his American status, he maintained his Canadian heritage: "There's no way you can be a Canadian and think you can lose it ... Canadians are a goodly group. They are very aware of caring and helping."  On 19 May 2005, during the centennial gala of his birth province, Saskatchewan, Leslie Nielsen was introduced to HM Queen Elizabeth II.   In 1997, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him. On 20 February 2002, Nielsen was named an honorary citizen of West Virginia and an "Ambassador of Mountain State Goodwill". Nielsen visited the state many times to speak and visit friends.  In 2003, in honor of Nielsen, Grant MacEwan College named its school of communications after him.    Also in 2003, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists awarded him the ACTRA Award of Excellence. 
Filmography
Films

Year Film Role Other notes 
1955  The Battle of Gettysburg  Narrator   
1956  Ransom!  Charlie Telfer  Film debut, as an actor 
Forbidden Planet  Commander John J. Adams   
The Vagabond King  Thibault   
The Opposite Sex  Steve Hilliard   
1957  Hot Summer Night  William Joel Partain   
Tammy and the Bachelor  Peter Brent   
1958  The Sheepman  Col. Stephen Bedford / Johnny Bledsoe   
1960  Route 66 (TV series)    
1964  See How They Run  Elliot Green  First television movie. 
Night Train to Paris  Alan Holiday   
1965  Dark Intruder  Brett Kingsford   
Harlow  Richard Manley   
1966  The Plainsman  Col. George Armstrong Custer   
Beau Geste  Lieutenant De Ruse   
1967  Code Name: Heraclitus  Fryer   
The Reluctant Astronaut  Major Fred Gifford   
Gunfight in Abilene  Grant Evers   
Rosie!  Cabot Shaw   
1968  How to Steal the World  General Maximilian Harmon  The Man from U.N.C.L.E. film. 
Counterpoint  Victor Rice   
Dayton's Devils Frank Dayton   
Companions in Nightmare  Dr. Neesden   
1969  Trial Run  Jason Harkness   
Deadlock  Lieutenant Sam Danforth   
How to Commit Marriage  Phil Fletcher   
Change of Mind  Sherrif Webb   
1970  Night Slaves  Sherrif Henshaw   
The Aquarians  Official   
Hauser's Memory Joseph Slaughter   
1971  Incident In San Francisco  Lieutenant Brubaker   
Four Rode Out  Mr. Brown   
They Call It Murder Frank Antrim   
1972  The Poseidon Adventure  Captain Harrison   
1973  ...And Millions Die!  Jack Gallagher   
Snatched  Bill Sutting   
Amanda Fallon  Mr. Cummings   
The Return of Charlie Chan Alexander Hadrachi   
1975  Can Ellen Be Saved  Arnold Lindsey   
Threshold: The Blue Angels Experience  Narrator   
1976  Grand Jury  John Williams   
Project Kill  Jonathan Trevor   
Brinks: The Great Robbery  Agent Norman Houston   
1977  Sixth and Main  John Doe   
Day of the Animals  Paul Jenson   
Viva Knievel!  Stanley Millard   
The Kentucky Fried Movie  Man in Feel-O-Rama Movie  Uncredited cameo; Feel-O-Rama segment. 
The Amsterdam Kill  Riley Knight   
1978  Little Mo  Nelson Fisher   
1979  Institute for Revenge  Counselor Hollis Barnes   
The Albertans  Don MacIntosh   
Riel  Major Crozier   
City on Fire  Mayor William Dudley   
1980  OHMS  Governor   
Airplane!  Dr. Rumack  First comedy role. 
Prom Night  Mr. Raymond Hammond   
1981  A Choice of Two  Unknown   
1982  Twilight Theater  Various Characters   
Foxfire Light  Reece Morgan   
Wrong Is Right  Mallory   
Creepshow  Richard Vickers  Something To Tide You Over segment. 
1983  Prime Time  Unknown   
The Night the Bridge Fell Down  Paul Warren   
Cave-In!  Joseph 'Joe' Johnson   
The Creature Wasn't Nice (Spaceship)  Capt. Jamieson   
1985  Murder Among Friends  Unknown   
Reckless Disregard  Bob Franklin   
Blade in Hong Kong  Harry Ingersoll   
Striker's Mountain  Jim McKay   
1986  The Patriot  Admiral Frazer   
Soul Man  Mr. Dunbar   
1987  Nightstick  Thad Evans   
Nuts   Allen Green  Final non-comedy role. 
Home Is Where the Hart Is  Sherrif Nashville Schwartz   
1988  Dangerous Curves  Greg Krevske   
The Railway Dragon  Narrator  First animated film. 
The Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!  Lt. Frank Drebin  First starring role. 
1990  Repossessed  Father Jebedaiah Mayii   
1991  All I Want for Christmas Santa Claus  Family holiday film. 
The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear  Lt. Frank Drebin   
Chance of a Lifetime  Lloyd Dixon   
1993  Digger  Arthur Evrensel   
Surf Ninjas  Colonel Chi   
1994  S.P.Q.R.: 2,000 and a Half Years Ago  Lucio Cinico   
Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult  Lt. Frank Drebin   
1995  Mr. Willowby's Christmas Tree  Willowby's butler   
Rent-a-Kid  Harry Haber   
Dracula: Dead and Loving It  Count Dracula   
1996  Spy Hard  Dick Steele, Agent WD-40   
1997  Mr. Magoo  Mr. Magoo  
1998  Safety Patrol  Mr. Penn   
Family Plan  Harry Haber   
Harvey  Dr. Chumley   
Wrongfully Accused  Ryan Harrison   
1999  Pirates 4-D  Captain Lucky  4D Cinema Show presented at various Busch Gardens amusement parks. 
2000  Santa Who?  Santa Claus   
2001: A Space Travesty  Marshal Richard 'Dick' Dix   
2001  Camouflage  Jack Potter   
Kevin of the North (Chilly Dogs)  Clive Thornton   
2002  Men with Brooms  Gordon Cutter   
2003  Scary Movie 3  President Harris   
Noël Noël  English Narrator   
2006  Scary Movie 4  President Harris   
2007  Music Within  Bill Austin   
2008  Superhero Movie  Uncle Albert   
An American Carol  Grampa / Himself   
Slap Shot 3: The Junior League  Mayor of Charlestown   
2009  Spanish Movie  Doctor   
Stan Helsing  Kay   
2011  Stonerville  Producer   
2012  The Waterman Movie  Ready Espanosa  Voice acting  

Television 

Year Title Role Other Notes 
1953  Jukebox Jury  Himself   
1958–1961  Alfred Hitchcock Presents  Lloyd Ashley & DA Rudolph Cox  Two episodes 
1959  The Swamp Fox  Colonel Francis Marion   
1960  Thriller  Alan Patterson (lead role) Episode "The Twisted Image" 
1960, 1964 Wagon Train  Jeremy Dow, Brian Conlin Two episodes 
1960  The Untouchables  Tom Sebring Episode "Three Thousand Suspects" 
1961  The New Breed  Lt. Price Adams  Regular 
1963  Channing  Professor Paul Stafford  Single episode 
1963–1964  The Fugitive (TV series)  Martin C. Rowland & Harold Cheyney Two episodes 
1964  Your First Impression  As himself  Single episode 
1964  The Alfred Hitchcock Hour Steven Grainger  Single episode 
1964–1969  The Virginian  Ben Stratton  Five episodes 
1965 Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea  Capt. Wayne Adams  One episode "The Creature" 
1965   Peyton Place  Vincent and Kenneth Marham (twins)  19 episodes 
1967  Bonanza  Sheriff Paul Rowan  One episode 
1968  The Man from U.N.C.L.E.  General Maximillian Harmon  Single episode "The Seven Wonders of the World Affair Pt 1 & 2" 
1969  The Bold Ones: The Protectors  Deputy Police Chief Sam Danforth  Seven episodes 
1969–1974  Hawaii Five-O  Brent & Colonel Faraday  Two episodes 
1971–1975  Columbo  Peter Hamilton & Geronimo  Two episodes 
1971  Bearcats!  Col. Ted Donovan  Single episode 
1971  Night Gallery  The Phantom, Col. Dennis Malloy  Two episodes: "Phantom of What Opera?" and "A Question of Fear" 
1973  M*A*S*H  Col. Buzz Brighton  Episode "The Ringbanger" 
1973–1974  The Streets of San Francisco  Ofc. Joe Landers, Insp. John T. Connor, & Big Jake Wilson  Three episodes 
1974  Cannon  Eric Strauss  Single episode 
1974  Kojak  Michael Hagar  Single episode "Loser Takes All" 
1975  Kung Fu  Vincent Corbino  Four episodes 
1975–1976  S.W.A.T.  Larry Neal/Vince Richie  Three episodes 
1979  Backstairs at the White House  Ike Hoover  Three episodes 
1980  The Littlest Hobo  Mayor Chester Montgomery  Episode "Romiet and Julio" 
1982  Police Squad!  Det. Frank Drebin  Nominated for an Emmy Award 
1984  Shaping Up  Buddy Fox   
1985–1986  Murder, She Wrote  Captain Daniels & David Everett  Two episodes 
1987  Highway to Heaven  Richard R. Benson   
1988  Who's the Boss?  Max   
1988  Day By Day  Jack Harper  One episode, nominated for an Emmy Award 
1989  Saturday Night Live  Himself  Single episode 
1992  The Golden Girls  Lucas Hollingsworth  Series finale 
1993  Herman's Head  God  Single episode 
1994–1999  Due South  Sgt. Buck Frobisher  Four episodes 
1994–1996, 2001–2002  Katie and Orbie  Narrator   
1995  Mr. Willowby's Christmas Tree  Mr. Willowby's Butler, Baxter  Television Christmas special 
2000  Santa Who?  Santa Claus  Television film 
2001  Liocracy  Terrence Brynne McKennie   
2003  Chilly Beach  Santa Claus  Single episode 
2004  Zeroman  Les Mutton / Zeroman   
2007  Doctor*Ology  Himself, Host   
Lipshitz Saves the World  Lipshitz's mentor  Pilot 
Robson Arms  Cado Vasco  

Video

1993: Bad Golf Made Easier
1994: Bad Golf My Way
1997: Stupid Little Golf Video
1997: National Geographic Video: The Savage Garden
Nielsen also appeared in a promotional video for Layman Allen's mathematics game called "Equations" and in the Seaworld San Antonio Summer Nights 4-D show "Pirates 4-D".


Writing

1993: The Naked Truth


References 
External links 
 
 

 
CBC Digital Archives – Leslie and Erik Nielsen laugh it up
  
DEFAULTSORT






























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Josquin des Prez
Josquin des Prez [Josquin Lebloitte dit Desprez] ( ; c. 1450/1455 – 27 August 1521), often referred to simply as Josquin, was a Franco-Flemish composer of the Renaissance. He is also known as Josquin Desprez and Latinized as Josquinus Pratensis, alternatively Jodocus Pratensis, although he himself expressed his preferred spelling of his name, Josquin des Prez, in an acrostic in his motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix.   He was the most famous European composer between Guillaume Dufay and Palestrina, and is usually considered to be the central figure of the Franco-Flemish School. Josquin is widely considered by music scholars to be the first master of the high Renaissance style of polyphonic vocal music that was emerging during his lifetime.During the 16th century, Josquin gradually acquired the reputation as the greatest composer of the age, his mastery of technique and expression universally imitated and admired. Writers as diverse as Baldassare Castiglione and Martin Luther wrote about his reputation and fame; theorists such as Heinrich Glarean and Gioseffo Zarlino held his style as that best representing perfection.  He was so admired that many anonymous compositions were attributed to him by copyists, probably to increase their sales.  More than 370 works are attributed to him;  it was only after the advent of modern analytical scholarship that some of these mistaken attributions have been challenged, on the basis of stylistic features and manuscript evidence. Yet in spite of Josquin's colossal reputation, which endured until the beginning of the Baroque era and was revived in the 20th century, his biography is shadowy, and we know next to nothing about his personality. The only surviving work which may be in his own hand is a graffito on the wall of the Sistine Chapel, and only one contemporary mention of his character is known, in a letter to Duke Ercole I of Ferrara. The lives of dozens of minor composers of the Renaissance are better documented than the life of Josquin. Josquin wrote both sacred and secular music, and in all of the significant vocal forms of the age, including masses, motets, chansons and frottole. During the 16th century, he was praised for both his supreme melodic gift and his use of ingenious technical devices. In modern times, scholars have attempted to ascertain the basic details of his biography, and have tried to define the key characteristics of his style to correct misattributions, a task that has proved difficult, as Josquin liked to solve compositional problems in different ways in successive compositions—sometimes he wrote in an austere style devoid of ornamentation, and at other times he wrote music requiring considerable virtuosity.  Heinrich Glarean wrote in 1547 that Josquin was not only a "magnificent virtuoso" (the Latin can be translated also as "show-off") but capable of being a "mocker", using satire effectively.  While the focus of scholarship in recent years has been to remove music from the "Josquin canon" (including some of his most famous pieces) and to reattribute it to his contemporaries, the remaining music represents some of the most famous and enduring of the Renaissance. Sherr, p. 10. 
Life

Birth and early careerLittle is known for certain of Josquin's early life. Much is inferential and speculative, though numerous clues have emerged from his works and the writings of contemporary composers, theorists, and writers of the next several generations. Josquin was born in the area controlled by the Dukes of Burgundy, and was possibly born either in Hainaut (modern-day Belgium), or immediately across the border in modern-day France, since several times in his life he was classified legally as a Frenchman (for instance, when he made his will). Josquin was long mistaken for a man with a similar name, Josquin de Kessalia, born around the year 1440, who sang in Milan from 1459 to 1474, dying in 1498. More recent scholarship has shown that Josquin des Prez was born around 1450 or a few years later, and did not go to Italy until the early 1480s.Around 1466, perhaps on the death of his father, Josquin was named by his uncle and aunt, Gilles Lebloitte dit Desprez and Jacque Banestonne, as their heir. Their will gives Josquin's actual surname as Lebloitte. According to Matthews and Merkley, "des Prez" was a nickname. According to an account by Claude Hémeré, a friend and librarian of Cardinal Richelieu whose evidence dates as late as 1633, and who used the records of the collegiate church of Saint-Quentin,  Josquin became a choirboy at Saint-Quentin, probably around 1460, and was in charge of its music. Doubt has been cast on the accuracy of Hémeré's account, however. Macey et al., §1.  He may have studied counterpoint under Ockeghem, whom he greatly admired throughout his life: this is suggested both by the testimony of Gioseffo Zarlino and Lodovico Zacconi, writing later in the 16th century, and by Josquin's eloquent lament on the death of Ockeghem in 1497, Nymphes des bois/Requiem aeternam, based on the poem by Jean Molinet.  All records from Saint-Quentin were destroyed in 1669; however the cathedral there was a center of music-making for the entire area, and in addition was an important center of royal patronage. Both Jean Mouton and Loyset Compère were buried there, and it is certainly possible that Josquin acquired his later connections with the French royal chapel through early experiences at Saint-Quentin.The first definite record of his employment is dated 19 April 1477, and it shows that he was a singer at the chapel of René, Duke of Anjou, in Aix-en-Provence. He remained there at least until 1478. No certain records of his movements exist for the period from March 1478 until 1483, but if he remained in the employ of René he would have transferred to Paris in 1481 along with the rest of the chapel. One of Josquin's early motets, Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo, suggests a direct connection with Louis XI, who was king during this time. In 1483 Josquin returned to Condé to claim his inheritance from his aunt and uncle, who may have been killed by the army of Louis XI in May 1478, when they besieged the town, locked the population into the church, and burned them alive. Macey et al.,  . 
MilanThe period of 1480 to 1482 has puzzled biographers: some contradictory evidence exists, suggesting either that Josquin was still in France, or was already in the service of the Sforza family, specifically with Ascanio Sforza, who had been banished from Milan and resided temporarily in Ferrara or Naples. Residence in Ferrara in the early 1480s could explain the Missa Hercules dux Ferrariae, composed for Ercole d'Este, but which stylistically does not fit with the usual date of 1503–4 when Josquin was known to be in Ferrara. Alternatively it has been suggested that Josquin spent some of that time in Hungary, based on a mid-16th century Roman document describing the Hungarian court in those years, and including Josquin as one of the musicians present. In either 1483 or 1484 Josquin is known to have been in the service of the Sforza family in Milan. While in their employ, he made one or more trips to Rome, and possibly also to Paris; while in Milan he made the acquaintance of Franchinus Gaffurius, who was maestro di cappella of the cathedral there. He was in Milan again in 1489, after a possible period of travel; but he left that year.
RomeFrom 1489 to 1495 Josquin was a member of the papal choir, first under Pope Innocent VIII, and later under the Borgia pope Alexander VI. He may have gone there as part of a singer exchange with Gaspar van Weerbeke, who went back to Milan at the same time. While there, he may have been the one who carved his name into the wall of the Sistine Chapel; a "JOSQUINJ" was recently revealed by workers restoring the chapel. Since it was traditional for singers to carve their names into the walls, and hundreds of names were inscribed there during the period from the 15th to the 18th centuries, it is considered highly likely that the graffiti is by Josquin – and if so, it would be his only surviving autograph.  Josquin's mature style evolved during this period; as in Milan he had absorbed the influence of light Italian secular music, in Rome he refined his techniques of sacred music. Several of his motets have been dated to the years he spent at the papal chapel.
Departure from Rome; Milan and FranceAround 1498 Josquin most likely re-entered the service of the Sforza family, on the evidence of a pair of letters between the Gonzaga and Sforza families.  He probably did not stay in Milan long, for in 1499 Louis XII captured Milan in his invasion of northern Italy and imprisoned Josquin's former employers. Around this time Josquin most likely returned to France, although documented details of his career around the turn of the 16th century are lacking. Prior to departing Italy he most likely wrote one of his most famous secular compositions, the frottola El grillo, as well as In te Domine speravi ("I have placed my hope in you, Lord"), based on Psalm 30. The latter composition may have been a veiled reference to the religious reformer Girolamo Savonarola, who had been burned at the stake in Florence in 1498, and for whom Josquin seems to have had a special reverence; the text was the Dominican friar's favorite psalm, a meditation on which he left incomplete in prison prior to his execution. Some of Josquin's compositions, such as the instrumental Vive le roy, have been tentatively dated to the period around 1500 when he was in France. A motet, Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo ("Remember thy promise unto thy servant"), was, according to Heinrich Glarean writing in the Dodecachordon of 1547, composed as a gentle reminder to the king to keep his promise of a benefice to Josquin, which he had forgotten to keep. According to Glarean's story, it worked: the court applauded, and the king gave Josquin his benefice. Upon receiving it, Josquin reportedly wrote a motet on the text Benefecisti servo tuo, Domine ("Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant") to show his gratitude to the king. 
FerraraJosquin probably remained in the service of Louis XII until 1503, when Duke Ercole I of Ferrara hired him for the chapel there.  One of the rare mentions of Josquin's personality survives from this time. Prior to hiring Josquin, one of Duke Ercole's assistants recommended that he hire Heinrich Isaac instead, since Isaac was easier to get along with, more companionable, was more willing to compose on demand, and would cost significantly less (120 ducats vs. 200). Ercole, however, chose Josquin. While in Ferrara, Josquin wrote some of his most famous compositions, including the austere, Savonarola-influenced Miserere,  which became one of the most widely-distributed motets of the 16th century; the utterly contrasting, virtuoso motet Virgo salutiferi;  and possibly the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae, which is written on a cantus firmus derived from the musical letters in the Duke's name, a technique known as soggetto cavato.Josquin did not stay in Ferrara long. An outbreak of the plague in the summer of 1503 prompted the evacuation of the Duke and his family, as well as two thirds of the citizens, and Josquin left by April of the next year, possibly also to escape the plague. His replacement, Jacob Obrecht, died of the plague in the summer of 1505,  to be replaced by Antoine Brumel in 1506, who stayed until the disbanding of the chapel in 1510.
Retirement to Condé-sur-l'EscautJosquin went directly from Ferrara to his home region of Condé-sur-l'Escaut, southeast of Lille on the present-day border between Belgium and France, becoming provost of the collegiate church of Notre-Dame on 3 May 1504, a large musical establishment that he headed for the rest of his life. Sherr, p. 16.  While the chapter at Bourges Cathedral asked him to become master of the choirboys there in 1508, it is not known how he responded, and there is no record of his having been employed there; most scholars presume he remained in Condé. During the last two decades of his life, Josquin's fame spread abroad along with his music. The newly-developed technology of printing made wide dissemination of his music possible, and Josquin was the favorite of the first printers: one of Petrucci's first publications, and the earliest surviving print of music by a single composer, was a book of Josquin's masses which he printed in Venice in 1502. This publication was successful enough that Petrucci published two further volumes of Josquin's masses, in 1504 and 1514, and reissued them several times. On his death-bed Josquin asked that he be listed on the rolls as a foreigner, so that his property would not pass to the Lords and Ladies of Condé.  This bit of evidence has been used to show that he was French by birth. Additionally, he left an endowment for the performance of his late motet, Pater noster/Ave Maria, at all general processions in the town when they passed in front of his house, stopping to place a wafer on the marketplace altar to the Holy Virgin. Pater noster may have been his last work. 
Music

OverviewJosquin lived during a transitional stage in music history. Musical styles were changing rapidly, in part owing to the movement of musicians between different regions of Europe.  Many northern musicians moved to Italy, the heart of the Renaissance, attracted by the Italian nobility's patronage of the arts; while in Italy, these composers were influenced by the native Italian styles, and often brought those ideas with them back to their homelands. The sinuous musical lines of the Ockeghem generation, the contrapuntal complexity of the Netherlanders, and the homophonic textures of the Italian lauda and secular music began to merge into a unified style; indeed Josquin was to be the leading figure in this musical process, which eventually resulted in the formation of an international musical language, of which the most famous composers included Palestrina and Lassus. Noble, Grove (1980) Josquin likely learned his craft in his home region in the North, in France, and then in Italy when he went to Milan and Rome. His early sacred works emulate the contrapuntal complexity and ornamented, melismatic lines of Ockeghem and his contemporaries, but at the same time he was learning his contrapuntal technique he was acquiring an Italianate idiom for his secular music: after all, he was surrounded by Italian popular music in Milan. By the end of his long creative career, which spanned approximately 50 productive years, he had developed a simplified style in which each voice of a polyphonic composition exhibited free and smooth motion, and close attention was paid to clear setting of text as well as clear alignment of text with musical motifs. While other composers were influential on the development of Josquin's style, especially in the late 15th century, he himself became the most influential composer in Europe, especially after the development of music printing, which was concurrent with the years of his maturity and peak output. This event made his influence even more decisive than it might otherwise have been.Many "modern" musical compositional practices were being born in the era around 1500. Josquin made extensive use of "motivic cells" in his compositions, short, easily-recognizable melodic fragments which passed from voice to voice in a contrapuntal texture, giving it an inner unity. This is a basic organizational principle in music which has been practiced continuously from approximately 1500 until the present day. Josquin wrote in all of the important forms current at the time, including masses, motets, chansons, and frottole. He even contributed to the development of a new form, the motet-chanson, of which he left at least three examples. In addition, some of his pieces were probably intended for instrumental performance.Each area of his output can be further subdivided by form or by hypothetical period of composition. Since dating Josquin's compositions is particularly problematic, with scholarly consensus only achieved on a minority of works, discussion here is by type.
Masses
Josquin wrote towards the end of the period in which the mass was the predominant form of sacred composition in Europe. The mass, as it had developed through the 15th century, was a long, multi-section form, with opportunities for large-scale structure and organization not possible in the other forms such as the motet. Josquin wrote some of the most famous examples of the genre, most using some kind of cyclic organization.He wrote masses using the following general techniques, although there is considerable overlap between techniques in individual compositions:

cantus firmus mass, in which a pre-existing tune appeared, mostly unchanged, in one voice of the texture, with the other voices being more or less freely composed;
paraphrase mass, in which a pre-existing tune was used freely in all voices, and in many variations;
parody mass, in which a pre-existing multi-voice song appeared in whole or in part, with material from all voices in use, not just the tune;
soggetto cavato, or solmization mass, in which the tune is drawn from the syllables of a name or phrase (for example "la sol fa re mi" — A, G, F, D, E — based on the syllables of Lascia fare mi ("leave me alone", a phrase used by an unknown patron, in a context around which much legend has arisen).
canon, in which an entire mass is based on canonic techniques, and no pre-existing material has been identified. 

Most of these techniques, particularly paraphrase and parody, become standardized during the first half of the 16th century; Josquin was very much a pioneer, and what was perceived as mixing of these techniques by later observers was actually the process by which they were created. Josquin was fond of canonic techniques, as were many other composers of his generation, and canon appears in all of his masses, sometimes to the exclusion of other structural devices.
Cantus-firmus massesPrior to Josquin's mature period, the most common technique for writing masses was the cantus firmus, a technique which had been in use already for most of the 15th century. It was the technique that Josquin used earliest in his career, with the Missa L'ami Baudichon, possibly his first mass.  This mass is based on a secular – indeed ribald – tune similar to "Three Blind Mice". That basing a mass on such a source was an accepted procedure is evident from the existence of the mass in Sistine Chapel part-books copied during the papacy of Julius II (1503 to 1513). Josquin's most famous cantus-firmus masses are the two based on the L'homme armé tune, which was the favorite tune for mass composition of the entire Renaissance. The earlier of the two, Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales, is a technical tour-de-force on the tune, containing numerous mensuration canons and contrapuntal display. It was by far the most famous of all his masses.  The second, Missa L'homme armé sexti toni, is a "fantasia on the theme of the armed man."  While based on a cantus firmus, it is also a paraphrase mass, for fragments of the tune appear in all voices. Technically it is almost restrained, compared to the other L'homme armé mass, until the closing Agnus Dei, which contains a complex canonic structure including a rare retrograde canon, around which other voices are woven. 
Paraphrase massesThe paraphrase technique differs from the cantus-firmus technique in that the source material, though it still consists of a monophonic original, is embellished, often with ornaments. As in the cantus-firmus technique, the source tune may appear in many voices of the mass.Several of Josquin's masses feature the paraphrase technique, and they include some of his most famous work. The relatively early Missa Ave maris stella, which probably dates from his years in the Sistine Chapel choir, paraphrases the Marian antiphon of the same name; it is also one of his shortest masses.  The late Missa de Beata Virgine paraphrases plainchants in praise of the Virgin Mary; it is a Lady Mass, a votive mass for Saturday performance, and was his most popular mass in the 16th century.  By far the most famous of Josquin's masses using the technique, and one of the most famous mass settings of the entire era, was the Missa pange lingua, based on the hymn by Thomas Aquinas for the Vespers of Corpus Christi. It was probably the last mass that Josquin composed.  This mass is an extended fantasia on the tune, using the melody in all voices and in all parts of the mass, in elaborate and ever-changing polyphony. One of the high points of the mass is the et incarnatus est section of the Credo, where the texture becomes homophonic, and the tune appears in the topmost voice; here the portion which would normally set "Sing, O my tongue, of the mystery of the divine body" is instead given the words "And he became incarnate by the Holy Ghost from the Virgin Mary, and was made man." 
Parody masses, masses on popular songsIn parody masses, the source material was not a single line, but an entire texture, often of a popular song. Several works by Josquin fall loosely into this category, including the Missa Fortuna desperata, based on the three-voice song Fortuna desperata (possibly by Antoine Busnois); the Missa Malheur me bat (based on a chanson variously ascribed to Obrecht, Ockeghem, or, most likely, Abertijne Malcourt);  and the Missa Mater Patris, based on a three-voice motet by Antoine Brumel. The Missa Mater Patris is probably the first true parody mass to be composed, for it no longer contains any hint of a cantus firmus.  Parody technique was to become the most usual means of mass composition for the remainder of the 16th century, although the mass gradually fell out of favor as the motet grew in esteem.
Masses on solmization syllablesThe earliest known mass by any composer using this method of composition – the soggetto cavato – is the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae, which Josquin probably wrote in the early 1480s for the powerful Ercole I, Duke of Ferrara. The notes of the cantus firmus are drawn from the musical syllables of the Duke's own name: Re – Ut – Re – Ut – Re – Fa – Mi – Re.  Another mass using this technique is the Missa La sol fa re mi, based on the musical syllables contained in "Lascia fare mi" ("leave me alone!"). The story, as told by Glareanus in 1547, was that an unknown aristocrat used to order suitors away with this phrase, and Josquin immediately wrote an "exceedingly elegant" mass on it as a jab at him. 
Canonic masses
Canonic masses came into increasing prominence in the latter part of the 15th century. Early examples include Ockeghem's famous Missa prolationum, consisting entirely of mensuration canons, the Missa L'homme armé of Guillaume Faugues, whose cantus firmus is presented in canon at the descending fifth, and the Missa [Ad fugam] of Marbrianus de Orto, based on freely composed canons at the fifth between superius and tenor. Josquin makes use of canon in the Osanna and Agnus Dei III of the Missa L'homme armé sexti toni, throughout the Missa Sine nomine, and in the final three movements of the Missa De beata virgine. The Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales incorporates mensuration canons in the Kyrie, Benedictus, and Agnus Dei II. 
MotetsJosquin's motet style varied from almost strictly homophonic settings with block chords and syllabic text declamation to highly ornate contrapuntal fantasias, to the psalm settings which combined these extremes with the addition of rhetorical figures and text-painting that foreshadowed the later development of the madrigal. He wrote many of his motets for four voices, an ensemble size which had become the compositional norm around 1500, and he also was a considerable innovator in writing motets for five and six voices.  No motets of more than six voices have been reliably attributed to Josquin.
Almost all of Josquin's motets use some kind of compositional constraint on the process; they are not freely composed.  Some of them use a cantus firmus as a unifying device; some are canonic; some use a motto which repeats throughout; some use several of these methods. The motets that use canon can be roughly divided into two groups: those in which the canon is plainly designed to be heard and appreciated as such, and another group in which a canon is present, but almost impossible to hear, and seemingly written to be appreciated by the eye, and by connoisseurs. Josquin frequently used imitation, especially paired imitation, in writing his motets, with sections akin to fugal expositions occurring on successive lines of the text he was setting. An example is his setting of Dominus regnavit (Psalm 93), for four voices; each of the lines of the psalm begins with a voice singing a new tune alone, quickly followed by entries of other three voices in imitation. Reese, p. 249 In writing polyphonic settings of psalms, Josquin was a pioneer, and psalm settings form a large proportion of the motets of his later years. Few composers prior to Josquin had written polyphonic psalm settings.  Some of Josquin's settings include the famous Miserere, written in Ferrara in 1503 or 1504 and most likely inspired by the recent execution of the reformist monk Girolamo Savonarola,  Memor esto verbi tui, based on Psalm 119, and two settings of De profundis (Psalm 130), both of which are often considered to be among his most significant accomplishments.  
Chansons and instrumental compositions 
In the domain of secular music, Josquin left numerous French chansons, for from three to six voices, as well as a handful of Italian secular songs known as frottole, as well as some pieces which were probably intended for instrumental performance. Problems of attribution are even more acute with the chansons than they are with other portions of his output: while about 70 three and four-voice chansons were published under his name during his lifetime, only six of the more than thirty five- and six-voice chansons attributed to him were circulated under his name during the same time. Many of the attributions added after his death are considered to be unreliable, and much work has been done in the last decades of the 20th century to correct attributions on stylistic grounds. Josquin's earliest chansons were probably composed in northern Europe, under the influence of composers such as Ockeghem and Busnois. Unlike them, however, he never adhered strictly to the conventions of the formes fixes – the rigid and complex repetition patterns of the rondeau, virelai, and ballade – instead he often wrote his early chansons in strict imitation, a feature they shared with many of his sacred works.  He was one of the first composers of chansons to make all voices equal parts of the texture; and many of his chansons contain points of imitation, in the manner of motets. However he did use melodic repetition, especially where the lines of text rhymed, and many of his chansons had a lighter texture, as well a faster tempo, than his motets.Inside of his chansons, he often used a cantus firmus, sometimes a popular song whose origin can no longer be traced, as in Si j'avoye Marion.  Other times he used a tune originally associated with a separate text; and still other times he freely composed an entire song, using no apparent external source material. Another technique he sometimes used was to take a popular song and write it as a canon with itself, in two inner voices, and write new melodic material above and around it, to a new text: he used this technique in one of his most famous chansons, Faulte d'argent ("The problem with money"), a song sung by a man who wakes in bed with a prostitute, broke and unable to pay her.Some of his chansons were doubtless designed to be performed instrumentally. That Petrucci published many of them without text is strong evidence of this; additionally, some of the pieces (for example, the fanfare-like Vive le roy) contain writing more idiomatic for instruments than voices. Josquin's most famous chansons circulated widely in Europe. Some of the better known include his lament on the death of Ockeghem, Nymphes des bois/Requiem aeternam; Mille regretz (the attribution of which has recently been questioned);  Plus nulz regretz; and Je me complains.In addition to his French chansons, he wrote at least three pieces in the manner of the Italian frottola, a popular Italian song form which he would have encountered during his years in Milan. These songs include Scaramella, El grillo, and In te domine speravi. They are even simpler in texture than his French chansons, being almost uniformly syllabic and homophonic, and they remain among the most frequently sung portions of his output.
Motet-chansonsWhile in Milan, Josquin wrote several examples of a new type of piece developed by the composers there, the motet-chanson. These compositions were texturally very similar to 15th century chansons in the formes fixes mold, except that unlike those completely secular works, they contained a chant-derived Latin cantus-firmus in the lowest of the three voices. The other voices, in French, sang a secular text which had either a symbolic relationship to the sacred Latin text, or commented on it.  Josquin's three known motet-chansons, Que vous madame/In pace, A la mort/Monstra te esse matrem, and Fortune destrange plummaige/Pauper sum ego, are similar stylistically to those by the other composers of the Milan chapel, such as Loyset Compère and Alexander Agricola.
InfluenceJosquin's fame lasted throughout the 16th century, and indeed increased for several decades after his death. Zarlino, writing in the 1580s, was still using examples from Josquin in his treatises on composition; and Josquin's fame was only eclipsed after the beginning of the Baroque era, with the decline of the pre-tonal polyphonic style. During the 18th and 19th centuries Josquin's fame was overshadowed by later Roman School composer Palestrina, whose music was seen as the summit of polyphonic refinement, and codified into a system of composition by theorists such as Johann Fux; however, during the 20th century, Josquin's reputation has grown steadily, to the point where scholars again consider him "the greatest and most successful composer of the age."   According to Richard Sherr, writing in the introduction to the Josquin Companion, addressing specifically the shrinking of Josquin's canon due to correction of misattributions, "Josquin will survive because his best music really is as magnificent as everybody has always said it was." Since the 1950s Josquin's reputation has been boosted by the increasing availability of recordings, of which there are many, and the rise of ensembles specializing in the performance of 16th century vocal music, many of which consider Josquin's output to be at the heart of their repertoire. 
Media 
Works listThe difficulties in compiling a works list for Josquin cannot be overstated. Because of his immense prestige in the early sixteenth century, many scribes and publishers did not resist the temptation of attributing anonymous or otherwise spurious works to Josquin. The German editor Georg Forster summed up the situation admirably in 1540 when he wrote, "Now that Josquin is dead, he is putting out more works than when he was alive."  Thus, the authenticity of many of the works listed below is disputed.
Masses

Missa Ave maris stella (Rome, 1486–1495) (4 voices)
Missa D'ung aultre amer (4 voices; authorship questioned by Jeremy Noble)
Missa de Beata Virgine (around 1510) (4 voices in parts I–II, 5 voices in parts III–V)
Missa Di dadi (=N'aray je jamais) (4 voices; authorship doubted by some scholars)
Missa Faisant regretz (4 voices)
Missa Fortuna desperata (4 voices)
Missa Gaudeamus (4 voices)
Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae (Ferrara, 1503/04) (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa La sol fa re mi (4 voices)
Missa L'ami Baudichon (4 voices)
Missa L'homme armé sexti toni (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales (4 voices)
Missa Malheur me bat (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa Mater patris (4 voices; authorship doubted by some scholars)
Missa Pange lingua (Condé, around 1514) (4 voices)
Missa Sine nomine (4 voices; canonic mass, originally titled "Missa Ad fugam")

Doubtful works:

Missa Ad fugam (4 voices)
Missa da pacem (4 voices)
Missa Une musque de Biscaye (4 voices)


Mass fragmentsOf questionable authenticity, with the exception of the Credo De tous biens playne:

Credo Chascun me crie (= Des rouges nez)
Credo De tous biens playne
Credo Vilayge (II)
Credo [Quarti toni] (canonic)
Gloria De beata virgine
Sanctus De passione
Sanctus D'ung aultre amer
Credo Vilayge (I)
Credo La belle se siet (probably Robert de Févin)


Motets

Absalon, fili mi (4vv) (attribution has been challenged; possibly Pierre de La Rue)
Absolve, quaesumus, Domine/Requiem aeternam (6vv) (attribution has been challenged)
Alma redemptoris mater;
Alma redemptoris mater / Ave regina caelorum;
Ave Maria, gratia plena ... benedicta tu (4vv);
Ave Maria, gratia plena ... Virgo serena (Milan 1484/85); 
Ave munda spes, Maria (not in first complete works edition)
Ave nobilissima creatura
Ave verum corpus natum
Benedicta es, caelorum regina
Christum ducem, qui per crucem (4vv)
De profundis clamavi (4vv) (possibly middle-period composition: attribution has been questioned)
De profundis clamavi (5vv) (late composition)
Domine exaudi orationem meam
Domine, ne in fuore tuo (4vv)
Domine, non secundum peccata nostra (2-4vv; for Rome)
Ecce, tu pulchra es, amica mea
Factum est autem
Gaude virgo, mater Christi
Homo quidam fecit cenam magnam
Honor, decus, imperium
Huc me sydereo descendere jussit Olympo (5vv)
Illibata Dei virgo nutrix
In exitu Israel de Aegypto
In illo tempore assumpsit Jesus doudecim disciplus
Iniquos odio habui (4vv, only tenor part survives)
In principio erat Verbum (authenticity has been questioned) 
Inviolata, integra et casta es, Maria
Jubilate Deo omnis terra
Liber generationis Jesu Christi
Magnificat quarti toni (attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds)
Magnificat terii toni (attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds)
Memor esto verbi tui
Miserere mei Deus (Ferrara, 1503)
Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo (France, 1480/83)
Missus est Gabriel angelus ad Mariam Virginem
Mittit ad virginem
Monstra te esse matrem
O admirabile commercium (part of a 5-motet cycle)
O bone et dulcissime Jesu
O Domine Jesu Christe (part of a Passion setting in 5 sections)
O virgo prudentissima
O virgo virginum
Pater noster, qui es in caelis (Condé, 1505–1521)
Planxit autem David
Praeter rerum seriem
Qui edunt me adhuc
Qui habitat in adiutorio altissimi
Qui velatus facie fuisti (part of a Passion setting in 6 sections)
Salve regina (4vv)
Salve regina (5vv, 1502)
Stabat Mater
Tu lumen, tu splendor
Tu solus qui facis mirabilia
Usquequo Domine oblivisceris me (attrib on stylistic grounds; only part survives)
Ut Phoebi radiis
Veni, sancte spiritus (also attrib to Forestier)
Victimae paschali laudes
Virgo prudentissima
Virgo salutiferi (Ferrara, 1504/05)
Vultum tuum deprecabuntur (7-part Passion cycle) (1480s)


Motet-chansons

A la mort / Monstra te esse matrem
Fortune destrange plummaige/Pauper sum ego
Que vous madame / In pace in idipsum


Chansons

A l'heure que je vous
A l'ombre d'ung buissonet, au matinet (3vv)
Adieu mes amours
Adieu mes amours (6vv or 7vv)
Baisé moy, ma doulce amye (4vv)
Belle, pour l'amour de vous
Bergerette savoyenne
Cela sans plus
Comment peult haver joye
Cueur langoreulx
De tous biens plaine (3vv)
De tous biens plaine (4vv)
Douleur me bat
Du mien amant
Dulces exuviae
En l'ombre d'ung buissonet tout, au long (3vv)
En l'ombre d'ung buissonet tout, au long (4vv)
Entré je suis en grant pensée (3vv)
Entré je suis en grant pensée (4vv)
Fama malum
Faulte d'argent
Fors seulement (only one of six voice parts survives)
Fortuna d'un gran tempo
Helas madame
Ile fantazies de Joskin
Incessament livré suis à martire
Je me complains
Je n'ose plus
Je ris et si ay larme
Je sey bien dire
La belle se siet
La Bernardina
La plus de plus
Le villain [jaloux]
Ma bouche rit et mon cueur pleure
Mille Regretz (4 voices)
Mon mary m'a diffamée
N'esse pas ung grant desplaisir
Nymphes des bois (written for the death of Johannes Ockeghem)
Nymphes, nappés / Circumdederunt me
Parfons regretz
Petite camusette;
Plaine de dueil
Plus n'estes ma maistresse
Plus nulz regretz (written between 1508 and 1511, commemorating the 1507 Treaty of Calais);
Plusieurs regretz
Pour souhaitter
Quant je vous voye
Qui belles amours a
Recordans de my signora
Regretz sans fin;
Se congié prens
Si j'ay perdu mon amy (3vv)
Si j'ay perdu mon amy (4vv)
Tant vous aimme Bergeronette
Tenz moy en voz bras
Une mousque de Biscaye;
Vive le roy (instrumental piece, written for Louis XII)
Vous l'arez, s'il vous plaist
Vous ne l'arez pas
textless (4vv)


Frottole

El Grillo
In te Domine speravi per trovar pietà
Scaramella va alla guerra


References and further reading

Atlas, Allan W., ed. Renaissance Music: Music in Western Europe, 1400–1600. New York: Norton, 1998. ISBN 0-393-97169-4.
Blackburn, Bonnie J. "Masses Based on Popular Songs and Solmization Syllables". The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 51–88. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5
Brown, Howard M. "Chanson" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Charles, Sydney R. Josquin des Prez: A Guide to Research. New York and London: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1983.
Clutterham, Leslie. "Dating Josquin's Enigmatic Motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix". Choral Journal 38, no. 3 (October 1997): 9–14. Online version as "Auobiographical  [ sic   Constructions in Josquin's Motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix: Evidence for a Later Dating]" (Accessed 8 May 2012).
Duffin, Ross W., ed. A Josquin Anthology. Oxford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-19-353218-2.
Elders, Willem, ed. New Josquin Edition, 30 vols. Utrecht: Koninklijke Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis, 1987- . ISBN 978-90-6375-051-0.
Elders, Willem, and and Frits de Haen, eds. Proceedings of the International Josquin Symposium, Utrecht 1986 . Utrecht: Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis, 1986. ISBN 90-6375-148-6.
Fallows, David. Josquin. Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2009, ISBN 978-2-503-53065-9.
Gleason, Harold, and Warren Becker. Music in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Bloomington, Indiana: Frangipani Press, 1981. ISBN 0-89917-034-X.
Godt, Irving. "Motivic Integration in Josquin's Motets." Journal of Music Theory, 21, 2 (Autumn, 1977): 264–92.
Higgins, Paula. "The Apotheosis of Josquin des Prez and Other Mythologies of Musical Genius". Journal of the American Musicological Society, 57, 3 (Autumn, 2004): 443–510.
Lowinsky, Edward E., ed. Josquin des Prez. London: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Macey, Patrick. Bonfire Songs: Savonarola's Musical Legacy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1998. ISBN 0-19-816669-9.
   
Matthews, Lora, and Paul Merkley. "Josquin des Prez". The Journal of Musicology (Summer 1998).  
Merkley, Paul. "Josquin Desprez in Ferrara". The Journal of Musicology 18, 4 (2001): 544–83.
Milsom, John. "Motets for Five or More Voices". In The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 281–320. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5
Noble, Jeremy. "Josquin Desprez (works)" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Pietschmann, Klaus. "Ein Graffito von Josquin Desprez auf der Cantoria der Sixtinischen Kapelle" Die Musikforschung vol. 52 no. 2 (1999), pp. 204–207.
Reese, Gustave. Music in the Renaissance. New York: W. W. Norton, 1954. ISBN 0-393-09530-4.
Reese, Gustave. "Josquin Desprez (biography)" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Reese, Gustave, Jeremy Noble, Lewis Lockwood, Jessie Ann Owens, James Haar, Joseph Kerman, and Robert Stevenson. The new Grove High Renaissance Masters: Josquin, Plaestrina, Lassus, Byrd, Victoria. The Composer Biography Series; The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London: Macmillan Publishers, 1980–84. ISBN 0-393-30093-5.
Sherr, Richard, ed. The Josquin Companion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5.
Wegman, Rob C. "Who Was Josquin?" In The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 21–50. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5


Notes 
Recordings

1993 – Renaissance-polyfonie in Brugge. The Songbook of Zeghere van Male.. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1155. Contains a recording of O intemerata and Mille regretz.
1996 – Pierre de la Rue . Missa Alleluia. Music at the Burgundy Court. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1232. Contains a recording of Gaude Virgo and Huc me sidereo by Josquin des Prez
1996 – Oh Flanders Free. Music of the Flemish Renaissance: Ockeghem, Josquin, Susato, De la Rue. Capilla Flamenca. Alamire LUB 03, Naxos 8.554516. Contains a recording of El grillo, Guillaume se va chaufer and Kyrie from Missa la sol fa re mi by Josquin des Prez
1998 – Margarete – Maximilian I. Musik um 1500. Capilla Flamenca with La Caccia, Schola Cantorum Cantate Domino Aalst, Schola Gregoriana Lovaniensis. ORF Shop CD 265 (2 CDs). Contains a recording of Adieu mes amours by Josquin des Prez.
2000 – Magic. Flanders Recorder Quartet and friends. Contains a recording of Mille Regretz and Scaramella by Josquin des Prez.
2002 – Pierre de la Rue: Missa de septem doloribus. Capilla Flamenca and Psallentes. MEW 0207. Contains a recording of Stabat mater by Josquin des Prez.
2005 – Dulcis Melancholia. Biographie musicale de Marguerite d’Autriche. Capilla Flamenca. MEW 0525. Contains a recording of Belle pour l'amour de vous, Plus nulz regretz and Que vous madame / In pace by Josquin Desprez.
2007 – Désir D'aymer. Love Lyrics Around 1500: From Flanders To Italy. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1369. Contains a recording of Baisés moy (4 voices and 6 voices) and O venus bant by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Salve Mater Salve Jesu. Chant and Polyphony From Bohemia Around 1500. Capilla Flamenca and Schola Gregoriana Pragensis, with Barbara Maria Willi. KTC 1346. Contains a recording of Qui velatus facie fuisti by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Music for the Soul Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 001. Contains a recording of the Agnus Dei from the Missa da pace and the Agnues Dei from the Missa L'homme armee by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Mediaeval Magic Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 002. Contains a recording of Praeter rerum seriem by Josquin des Prez.
2009 – Lay a garland Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 003. Contains a recording of Absalon, fili mi attributed to Josquin des Prez.


External links

 
 
Free access to high-resolution images of manuscripts containing works by Josquin from Digital Image Archive of Medieval Music
 
 
 
Josquin biography and discography
Listen to free recordings of compositions from Umeå Akademiska Kör.
Motet Ave Maria as interactive hypermedia (Shockwave required) at the BinAural Collaborative Hypertext

   
 
DEFAULTSORT



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Larry Bird
 
 
 
Larry Joe Bird (born December 7, 1956) is an American former NBA basketball player, coach, and team president. Drafted into the NBA sixth overall by the Boston Celtics in 1978, Bird started at small forward and power forward for thirteen seasons, spearheading one of the NBA's most formidable frontcourts that included center Robert Parish and forward Kevin McHale. Bird was a 12-time NBA All-Star and was named  the league's Most Valuable Player (MVP) three times. He played his entire professional career for Boston, winning three NBA championships.Due to chronic back problems, he retired as a player in 1992.  He was a member of the Dream Team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics. Bird was voted to the NBA's 50th Anniversary All-Time Team Larry Bird summary NBA.com.  in 1996 and inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame  in 1998. He served as head coach of the Indiana Pacers from 1997 to 2000. In 2003, he assumed the role of president of basketball operations for the Pacers, and he held that position until 2012.  In addition to being part of the 50–40–90 Club, he is the only person in NBA history to be named Most Valuable Player, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year.   
Early lifeLarry Bird was born in West Baden, Indiana, the son of Georgia (née Kerns) and Claude Joseph "Joe" Bird.    He grew up in both West Baden and the adjacent town French Lick, which earned him the nickname "the Hick from French Lick" in his professional basketball career.    Bird recalled how his mother would make do on the family's meager earnings: "If there was a payment to the bank due, and we needed shoes, she'd get the shoes, and then deal with them guys at the bank. I don't mean she wouldn't pay the bank, but the children always came first."    According to Bird, his being poor as a child "motivates me to this day".  He sometimes was sent to live with his grandmother due to the family's struggles. The Bird family's struggle with poverty was compounded by the alcoholism and personal difficulties of Joe Bird, who likely suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder from serving in the Korean War.  Joe Bird committed suicide on February 3, 1975, when Larry was 18 years old. Bird started for French Lick/West Baden's high school team, Springs Valley High School, where he left as the school's all-time scoring leader.    Bird's high school coach, Jim Jones, was a key factor to Bird's success. "Jonesie", as Bird called him, would come help Bird and his friends practice any day of the week.  Bird would often go to the gym early, shoot between classes, and stay late into the evening.
Collegiate careerBird received a scholarship to play college basketball for Bob Knight and the Indiana University Hoosiers in 1974.  However, he was overwhelmed by the size of the campus and number of students and was not mentally ready for this stage of life; according to Bird, "it didn't take long to realize that I was out of my cocoon."  Bird was also treated poorly by an established IU star, Kent Benson; as Bird recalled, the other upperclassmen of the team treated him well.  He dropped out of Indiana after 24 days, disappointing his mother. Magic & Bird: A Courtship of Rivals. HBO, 2010.  Bird returned home to French Lick where he enrolled in the nearby Northwood Institute before dropping out and getting a job with the Street Department (the department picked up garbage, repaired roads, removed snow, mowed lawns, etc.) for a year.  He played AAU basketball for Hancock Construction  and, after that year, decided to enroll at Indiana State University in Terre Haute, where he was coached by Bob King.King suffered a stroke prior to the 1978–79 season and assistant Bill Hodges, who had persuaded Bird to return to college basketball,  was promoted to head coach. Before Bird, the Sycamores had never been to the Division I NCAA tournament;  he led the team to the NCAA championship game in 1979, his senior season, only to lose to the Michigan State University Spartans, who were led by his future NBA rival, Earvin "Magic" Johnson. The Sycamores finished the season 33–1. That year, Bird won the USBWA College Player of the Year, Naismith and Wooden Awards, given to the year's top male college basketball player. After his three seasons at Indiana State, he left as the fifth-highest scorer in NCAA history. Bird finished his collegiate career with an average of 30.3 points per game. In 2007, he was voted as one of the Missouri Valley Conference men's basketball 50 greatest players. 
NCAA career statistics
  
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1976–77
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 28 || ... || 36.9 || .544 || ... || .840 || 13.3 || 4.4 || ... || ... || 32.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1977–78
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 32 || ... || ... || .524 || ... || .793 || 11.5 || 3.9 || ... || ... || 30.0
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1978–79
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 34 || ... || ... || .532 || ... || .831 || 14.9 || 5.5 || ... || ... || 28.6
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 
| style="text-align:left;"| Career Larry Bird, basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 20, 2010. 
| 94 || ... || ... || .533 || ... || .822 || 13.3 || 4.6 || ... || ... || 30.3
|-
 
1979–1981: Immediate impactThe Boston Celtics selected the 6'9", 220-pound Bird 6th overall in the 1978 NBA Draft,   even though they were uncertain whether he would enter the NBA or remain at Indiana State to play his senior season. Bird ultimately decided to play his final college season, but the Celtics retained their exclusive right to sign him until the 1979 NBA Draft, because of the NBA's "junior eligible" rule (allowing a collegiate player to be drafted when the player's original "entering" class was graduating and giving them one calendar year to sign them, even if they went back to college).  Shortly before that deadline, and after bitter contract negotiations, Bird agreed to sign with the Celtics, inking a 5 year $3.25 million contract which made him, at the time, the highest-paid rookie in the history of the NBA.   Shortly afterwards, the NBA draft eligibility rules were changed to prevent teams from drafting players before they were ready to sign.  The rule is called the Bird Collegiate Rule.Bird's impact on the Celtics was immediate. The Celtics were 29–53 during the 1978–79 season, but with Bird the team improved to 61–21 in the 1979–80 season, posting the league's best regular season record. Bird's collegiate rival, Magic Johnson, also had entered the NBA in 1979, joining the Los Angeles Lakers. In 1980, despite a strong rookie season from Johnson, Bird was named the league's Rookie of the Year and was voted onto the Eastern Conference All-Star team (an honor he would receive for each of his 12 full seasons in the NBA). For the 1980 season, Bird led the Celtics in scoring (21.3 points/game), rebounding (10.4 rebounds/game), steals (143), and minutes played (2,955) and was second in assists (4.5 assists/game) and three-pointers (58). Though Boston was beaten by the more athletic Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern Conference finals that year, Bird's addition to the team had renewed the promise of Celtic glory.Following Bird's first season, the Celtics acquired center Robert Parish and the 3rd pick in the 1980 NBA Draft via a trade with the Golden State Warriors (in exchange for the 1st and 13th picks in the draft). After the Warriors took Joe Barry Carroll with the 1st pick and the Utah Jazz chose Darrell Griffith second, the Celtics selected University of Minnesota power forward Kevin McHale. With Bird at small forward, the additions of Parish and McHale gave Boston one of the most formidable frontcourts in the history of the NBA. The three would anchor the Celtics throughout Bird's career.In his second season, Bird led the Celtics into the playoffs, where they faced off for a second consecutive year with Julius Erving's Philadelphia 76ers. Bird helped the Celtics overcome a 3–1 deficit by winning the last three games by two, two, and one point margins, propelling them into the NBA Finals, where they defeated the Houston Rockets in six games with Bird averaging 15.3 points on .419 shooting, 15.3 rebounds and 7.0 assists per game.  It would be the first of three championships in Bird's career, as well as the first of his five Finals appearances.
1982–1987: MVPs, championships and the rivalry with Magic Johnson 
The additions of Bird and Johnson rejuvenated the NBA, which had suffered from low attendance and minimal television interest through much of the 1970s. Immediately upon their entry into the league, the two players became repeating presences in the NBA Finals. Johnson's Lakers won the championship in 1980, Bird's Celtics captured the NBA title in 1981, and Johnson's Lakers wrested it back in 1982. Bird and Johnson first dueled in the 1979 NCAA title game; as professional basketball players, they would face off numerous times during the 1980s, including the NBA Finals of 1984, 1985 and 1987. Lakers versus Celtics, and specifically Bird versus Magic, quickly became one of the greatest rivalries in the history of basketball.In 1984, the Celtics defeated the Lakers in a seven-game Finals, winning game seven 111–102.  Bird averaged 27.4 points on .484 shooting and 14 rebounds a game during the series,  earning the award of Finals Most Valuable Player (MVP). Bird was also named the league regular season MVP for that year.  In 1985, however, the Lakers avenged the loss, defeating the Celtics in game 6 of the Finals in the Boston Garden. In a losing effort against Los Angeles, Bird averaged 23.8 points on .449 shooting, 8.8 rebounds and 5.0 assists per game.  That year, the NBA again named Bird the league MVP. On  , in a game played between the Celtics and Atlanta Hawks at the University of New Orleans Lakefront Arena in New Orleans, Louisiana, Bird scored a career high 60 points in a tremendous shooting display.  Bird scored all 19 of his points in the third quarter without the aid of a free throw; instead, he scored on jump shots from 20 feet and out.  Bird scored Boston's last sixteen points in the game.  In the fourth quarter, he made a fadeaway three-point shot while being fouled.  He was not given continuation and the basket was not allowed (instead it was ruled a non-shooting foul and he received two free throws).  Bird's 59th and 60th points were scored on a 17-foot jump shot at the buzzer.  For the game, Bird officially shot 22 of 36 from the field, 1 of 4 from three-point range, and 15 of 16 from the free throw line.Boston would have another great season the next year, with help from another Hall of Famer, Bill Walton. Walton, whose up and down career had been plagued by foot injuries, was looking for a team, and after having been turned down by the Lakers called Celtics president and general manager Red Auerbach in a last-ditch effort to close out his career on an upswing. Because of Walton's reputation for being injury prone, Auerbach was initially unwilling to take a risk on him, but Bird, who happened to be in Auerbach's office at the time of Walton's call, urged him to sign Walton, saying that if Walton felt he was healthy enough to play, it was all Bird needed to hear.With Walton backing up Kevin McHale and Robert Parish, the Celtics would return to the finals in 1986, albeit not against Johnson and the Lakers, who lost in the Western Conference Finals to the Houston Rockets. The 1986 Celtic team, which finished the regular season 67–15 and defeated the Rockets in six games, is generally considered to be the best of Bird's career. Bird again was named the Finals' MVP for that year, averaging 24 points on .482 shooting, 9.7 rebounds and 9.5 assists per game for the series.  He also won his third consecutive league MVP award,  a feat matched only by the great Celtic center Bill Russell and the dominant Wilt Chamberlain, who played for Philadelphia and Los Angeles.In 1987, the Celtics made their last Finals appearance of Bird's career, fighting through difficult series against the Milwaukee Bucks and Detroit Pistons but as they reached the NBA Finals, the Celtics, hampered by devastating injuries, lost to a dominant Lakers team which had won 65 games during the season. The Celtics ended up losing to the Lakers in six games, with Bird averaging 24.2 points on .445 shooting, 10 rebounds and 5.5 assists per game in the championship series.  The Celtics would fall short in 1988 losing to the Pistons in 6 games in the Eastern Conference Finals as the Pistons made up from the heartbreak the previous season. Between them, Bird and Johnson captured eight NBA championships during the 1980s, with Magic getting five and Bird three. During the 1980s, either Boston or Los Angeles appeared in every NBA Finals.  Throughout the 1980s, contests between the Celtics and the Lakers—both during the regular season and in the Finals—attracted enormous television audiences. The first regular season game between the Celtics and the Lakers in the 1987–88 season proved to be a classic with Magic Johnson banking in an off balance shot from near the three-point line at the buzzer for a 115–114 Lakers win at Boston Garden.  The historical rift between the teams, which faced each other several times in championship series of the 1960s, fueled fan interest in the rivalry. Not since Bill Russell squared off against Wilt Chamberlain had professional basketball enjoyed such a marquee matchup. The apparent contrast between the two players and their respective teams seemed scripted for television: Bird, the introverted small-town hero with the blue-collar work ethic, fit perfectly with the throwback, hard-nosed style of the Celtics, while the stylish, gregarious Johnson ran the Lakers' fast-paced "Showtime" offense amidst the bright lights and celebrities of Los Angeles. A 1980s Converse commercial for its "Weapon" line of basketball shoes (endorsed by both Bird and Johnson) reflected the perceived dichotomy between the two players. In the commercial, Bird is practicing alone on a rural basketball court when Johnson pulls up in a sleek limousine and challenges him to a one-on-one match.Despite the intensity of their rivalry, Bird and Johnson became friends off the court. Their friendship blossomed when the two players worked together to film the Converse commercial, which depicted them as archenemies. Johnson appeared at Bird's retirement ceremony on February 4, 1993 and emotionally described Bird as a "friend forever".
1988–1992: Waning years 
In 1988, Bird had the best statistical season of his career, but the Celtics failed to reach the NBA Finals for the first time in five years, losing to the Pistons in six games during the Eastern Conference Finals. Bird started the 1988–89 season, but ended his season after six games to have bone spurs surgically removed from both of his heels. He returned to the Celtics in 1989, but debilitating back problems and an aging Celtic roster prevented him from regaining his mid-1980s form. Nonetheless, through the final years of his career, Bird maintained his status as one of the premier players in the game. He averaged over 20 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists a game in his last three seasons with the Celtics, and shot better than 45% from the field in each. Bird led the Celtics to playoff appearances in each of those three seasons.Bird's body, however, continued to break down. He had been bothered by back problems for years, and his back became progressively worse. After leading the Celtics to a 29–5 start to the 1990–91 season, he missed 22 games due to a compressed nerve root in his back, a condition that would eventually lead to his retirement. He had off-season surgery to remove a disc from his back, but his back problems continued and he missed 37 games during the 1991–92 season.  His past glory would be briefly rekindled, however, in a game that season in which he scored 49 points in a double-overtime victory over the Portland Trail Blazers. During the 1992 Eastern Conference semi-finals against the Cleveland Cavaliers, Bird missed four of the seven games in the series due to those recurring back problems.
In the summer of 1992, Bird joined Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan and other NBA stars to play for the United States basketball team in that year's Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. It was the first time in America's Olympic history that the country sent professional basketball players to compete. The "Dream Team" won the men's basketball gold medal.Following his Olympic experience, on August 18, 1992, Bird announced his retirement as an NBA player. He finished his career with averages of more than 24 points, 10 rebounds and 6 assists per game, while shooting 49.6% from the field, 88.6% from the free throw line and 37.6% from three-point range. Following Bird's departure, the Celtics promptly retired his jersey number 33.In 1989, Bird published his autobiography, Drive: The Story of My Life with Bob Ryan. The book chronicles his life and career up to the 1989 NBA season.
NBA career after retirement 


The Celtics employed Bird as a special assistant in the team's front office from 1992 until 1997. In 1997, Bird accepted the position of coach of the Indiana Pacers and said he would be on the job for no more than three years. Despite having no previous coaching experience, Bird led the Pacers to a 58–24 record—the franchise's best as an NBA team at the time—in the 1997–98 season, and pushed the Bulls to seven games in the Eastern Conference finals.  He was named the NBA Coach of the Year for his efforts, becoming the only person in NBA history to have won both the MVP and Coach of the Year awards.  He then led the Pacers to two consecutive Central Division titles in 1999 and 2000, and a berth in the NBA finals in 2000.Bird resigned as Pacers coach shortly after the end of the 2000 season, following through on his initial promise to coach for only three years. In 2003, he returned as the Pacers' President of Basketball Operations, overseeing team personnel and coaching moves, as well as the team's draft selections.  Bird promoted David Morway to general manager in 2008, but Bird still had the final say in basketball matters. After the 2011–2012 NBA season, Bird was named NBA Executive of the Year.On June 27, 2012, a day before the 2012 NBA Draft, Bird and the Pacers announced that they would be parting ways later that summer. Bird said health issues were among the reasons for his leaving.  Donnie Walsh has been named to replace him. 
Head coaching record  
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|82||58||24||.707|| style="text-align:center;"|2nd in Central||16||10||6||.625
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in Conf. Finals
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|50||33||17||.660|| style="text-align:center;"|1st in Central||13||9||4||.692
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in Conf. Finals
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|82||56||26||.683|| style="text-align:center;"|1st in Central||23||13||10||.565
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in NBA Finals
|- class="sortbottom"
| style="text-align:left;"|Career
| ||214||147||67||.687|| ||52||32||20||.615
 
Legacy In 1999, Bird ranked No. 30 in ESPN's SportsCentury's 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th century.For the 2008 NBA Finals, which featured a rematch of the Celtics-Lakers rivalry, Bird appeared in a split-screen advertisement with Magic Johnson (as part of the "There Can Only Be One" campaign which had played throughout the 2008 NBA Playoffs but to that point only featured players from the two teams competing in a given series) discussing the meaning of rivalries.Bird was widely considered one of Red Auerbach's favorite players. He considered Bird to be the greatest basketball player of all time.  Auerbach was so enamored with the player that he drafted him out of Indiana State and waited a year before Bird was eligible to suit up for the Celtics.  During his introductory press conference, after Auerbach's contentious negotiations with agent Bob Woolf, Bird announced he "would have played for free."  This was after Woolf asked for the most lucrative contract in NBA history, to which Auerbach was quick to point out that Bird had not played a game in the NBA yet. Bird is the only person to be named an MVP, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year in the NBA. 
Player profileBird, a versatile wing man who played the power forward and small forward positions, is considered one of the greatest players of all time, to which his twelve All-Star team nominations are a testament. The sharpshooting Bird made his name stepping up his performance in critical situations, and is credited with a long list of dominating games, buzzer beaters and clutch defensive plays. He won two NBA Finals MVP and three regular-season MVP awards. He won them all in a row, a feat only shared by Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain.Bird possessed an uncanny and unparalleled ability to anticipate and react to the strategies of his opponents. His talent for recognizing the moves of opponents and teammates prompted his first coach with the Celtics, Bill Fitch, to nickname him "Kodak", because he seemed to formulate mental pictures of every play that took place on the court.Bird scored 24.3 points per game in his career on a high .496 field goal average, a stellar .886 free throw average (9th best all-time) and a 37.6 percentage on three-point shots. Bird was also a good rebounder (10.0 rebound career average) and an excellent playmaker (6.3 assist career average). His multidimensional game made him a consistent triple-double threat; Bird currently ranks fifth all-time in triple-doubles with 59, not including the 10 he recorded in the playoffs. Bird's lifetime player efficiency rating (PER) is 23.5, 18th all-time, a further testament to his all around game.  Additionally, he is the only 20, 10, 5 player in NBA history (points, rebounds, assists per game) with a lifetime PRA rating (points + rebounds + assists per game) of 40.6, which is 8th all-time.  Bird was the first player in NBA history to shoot 50% or better on field goals, 40% on three-pointers, and 90% on free-throws in a single NBA season while achieving the league minimum for makes in each category. Bird accomplished this feat twice and is second only to Steve Nash for seasons in the 50–40–90 Club.Bird is also remembered as an excellent defender. While he was neither fast nor quick-footed, and could not always shut down an individual player one-on-one, he consistently displayed a knack for anticipating the moves of his opponent, allowing him to intercept passes and create turnovers. His 1,556 career steals ranks 27th all-time.  Unspectacular but effective defensive moves, such as jumping into a passing lane to make a steal or allowing his man to step past and drive to the hoop, then blocking the opponent's shot from behind, were staples of Bird's defensive game. In recognition of his defensive abilities, Bird was named to three All-Defensive Second Teams.Bird's humble roots were the source of his most frequently used moniker, "The Hick From French Lick". Other observers called him "The Great White Hope".  He has also acquired the nickname "Larry Legend". Bird's competitive nature often emerged in nearly constant trash-talking on the court. Some notable examples follow:

During the three-point shooting contest on All-Star Weekend 1986, Bird entered the locker room, looked around without saying a word, then finally said, "I want all of you to know I am winning this thing.  I'm just looking around to see who's gonna finish up second." He won the shooting contest.
During one game on Christmas Day against the Indiana Pacers, before the game Bird told Chuck Person that he had a Christmas present waiting for him. During the game, when Person was on the bench, Bird shot a three-pointer on the baseline right in front of Person. Immediately after releasing the ball, Bird said to Person, "Merry f*%#ing Christmas!", and then the shot went in.  This was no doubt inspired by Person (nicknamed the "Rifleman") stating prior to the game that "The Rifleman is Coming, and He's Going Bird Hunting."
Reggie Miller recalled his encounter with Larry Bird's legendary trash talking ability in his book I Love Being the Enemy. Reggie tried to disrupt Larry's concentration when he was shooting free throws late in a game. Larry glared at him, made the first free throw and said, "You got to be kidding me. Rook, I'm the best shooter in the league right now. In the league. Understand? And you're up here trying to say something?"    Then Larry buried the second free throw.
Late in a tied game against the Seattle SuperSonics, Bird told Supersonics forward Xavier McDaniel, who was guarding him, “I’m going to get [the ball] right here and I am going to bury it in your face.”  As McDaniel remembers it, he responded by saying, “I know, I’ll be waiting.”  After a timeout, Bird made two baseline cuts, then posted in the exact spot he had indicated to McDaniel, paused, turned, and made it in his face.  He finished up the sequence by telling McDaniel, “I didn’t mean to leave two seconds on the clock.”  
On November 9, 1984, Bird was ejected along with Julius Erving in the third quarter after an on court scuffle. At the point of both ejections, Bird had outscored Erving 42 to 6. During the game, Bird had continuously informed Erving of their tallies with every chance he got to score. Bird denies this stating that it was teammate "M.L. (Carr) talking trash from the bench" during that game.  Eventually a shoving match ensued, then swings taken by both players, and finally a bench-clearing brawl.


NBA career statistics  

† NBA championship 
 Led the league   
 
Regular season 
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 82 || 36.0 || .474 || .406 || .836 || 10.4 || 4.5 || 1.7 || 0.6 || 21.3
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 82 || 39.5 || .478 || .270 || .863 || 10.9 || 5.5 || 2.0 || 0.8 || 21.2
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 77 || 58 || 38.0 || .503 || .212 || .863 || 10.9 || 5.8 || 1.9 || 0.9 || 22.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 79 || 79 || 37.7 || .504 || .286 || .840 || 11.0 || 5.8 || 1.9 || 0.9 || 23.6
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 79 || 77 || 38.3 || .492 || .247 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .888 || 10.1 || 6.6 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 24.2
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 80 || 77 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 39.5 || .522 || .427 || .882 || 10.5 || 6.6 || 1.6 || 1.2 || 28.7
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 81 || 38.0 || .496 || .423 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .896 || 9.8 || 6.8 || 2.0 || 0.6 || 25.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 74 || 73 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 40.6 || .525 || .400 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .910 || 9.2 || 7.6 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 28.1
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 76 || 75 || 39.0 || .527 || .414 || .916 || 9.3 || 6.1 || 1.6 || 0.8 || 29.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 6 || 6 || 31.5 || .471 || ... || .947 || 6.2 || 4.8 || 1.0 || 0.8 || 19.3
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 75 || 75 || 39.3 || .473 || .333 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .930 || 9.5 || 7.5 || 1.4 || 0.8 || 24.3
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 60 || 60 || 38.0 || .454 || .389 || .891 || 8.5 || 7.2 || 1.8 || 1.0 || 19.4
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 45 || 45 || 36.9 || .466 || .406 || .926 || 9.6 || 6.8 || 0.9 || 0.7 || 20.2
|- class=sortbottom
| style="text-align:left;" colspan=2| Career 
| 897 || 870 || 38.4 || .496 || .376 || .886 || 10.0 || 6.3 || 1.7 || 0.8 || 24.3
|-
 
Playoffs 
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1980
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 9 || 9 || 41.3 || .469 || .267 || .880 || 11.2 || 4.7 || 1.6 || 0.9 || 21.3
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1981†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 17 || 17 || 44.1 || .470 || .375 || .894 || 14.0 || 6.1 || 2.3 || 1.0 || 21.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1982
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 12 || 12 || 40.8 || .427 || .167 || .822 || 12.5 || 5.6 || 1.9 || 1.4 || 17.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1983
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 6 || 6 || 40.0 || .422 || .250 || .828 || 12.5 || 6.8 || 2.2 || 0.5 || 20.5
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1984†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || 41.8 || .524 || .412 || .879 || 11.0 || 5.9 || 2.3 || 1.2 || 27.5
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1985
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 20 || 20 || 40.8 || .461 || .280 || .890 || 9.1 || 5.8 || 1.7 || 1.0 || 26.0
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1986†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 18 || 18 || 42.8 || .517 || .411 || .927 || 9.3 || 8.2 || 2.1 || 0.6 || 25.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1987
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 44.1 || .476 || .341 || .912 || 10.0 || 7.2 || 1.2 || 0.8 || 27.0
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1988
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 17 || 17 || 44.9 || .450 || .375 || .894 || 8.8 || 6.8 || 2.1 || 0.8 || 24.5
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1990
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 5 || 5 || 41.4 || .444 || .263 || .906 || 9.2 || 8.8 || 1.0 || 1.0 || 24.4
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1991
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 10 || 10 || 39.6 || .408 || .143 || .863 || 7.2 || 6.5 || 1.3 || 0.3 || 17.1
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1992
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 4 || 2 || 26.8 || .500 || .000 || .750 || 4.5 || 5.3 || 0.3 || 0.5 || 11.3
|- class=sortbottom
| style="text-align:left;" colspan=2| Career 
| 164 || 162 || 42.0 || .472 || .321 || .890 || 10.3 || 6.5 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 23.8
|-
 
Career stats

Regular season:
Games: 897Win-Lost: 660-237Points: 21791Rebounds: 8974Assist: 5695
Playoffs:
Games: 164Win-Lost: 99-65Points: 3897Rebounds: 1683Assist: 1062
All-star games:
Games: 10Win-Lost: 8-2Points: 134Rebounds: 79Assist: 41
40 point games
Regular season

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 60 Win Atlanta Hawks Neutral       43 22 36 1 4 15 16 7 3 0 0 
2 53 Win Indiana Pacers Home    21 30 0  11 11     
3 50 Lost Dallas Mavericks Away   40 18 33 4 7 10 11 11 5 1 0 
4 50 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   39 19 25 1 1 11 12 13 7 0 0 
5 49 Win Washington Bullets Home   43 20 30 0 4 9 9 8 6 4 0 
6 49 Win Phoenix Suns Away   43 17 27 3 6 12 12 12 7 0 2 
7 49   Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   54 19 35 2 8 9 10 14 12 4 1 
8 48 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   42 20 32 0 2 8 9 14 5 1 1 
9 48 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   45 17 28 2 5 12 12 10 7 3 1 
10 48 Win Houston Rockets Home   43 17 32 0 2 14 15 15 7 2 0 
11 47   Lost Milwaukee Bucks Home    15 31 1  16 17 14    
12 47 Win Detroit Pistons Home   39 17 31 0 0 13 13 12 2 2 0 
13 47   Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   49 21 34 3 3 2 3 14 11 1 2 
14 47 Win New York Knicks Home   38 22 34 0 1 3 5 7 8 4 0 
15 47   Win Washington Bullets Away   53 19 29 1 2 8 10 8 7 2 0 
16 46 Win Orlando Magic Away   44 19 33 1 3 7 8 8 10 1 0 
17 45 Lost Phoenix Suns Away    19  3  4 4     
18 45 Win Indiana Pacers Away   45 18 31 1 3 8 11 12 5 5 0 
19 45 Win Charlotte Hornets Home   44 18 28 0 0 9 9 8 8 2 5 
20 44 Lost Houston Rockets Away   44 17 27 1 2 9 10 15 3 2 2 
21 44 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   44 17 35 1 5 9 9 11 8 1 0 
22 44 Win Chicago Bulls Home   40 19 29 0 0 6 6 10 3 1 1 
23 43 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Neutral       29 17 24 5 6 4 4 8 3 3 0 
24 43 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   46 17 30 1 4 8 9 10 8 2 1 
25 43 Win New Jersey Nets Home   39 16 29 2 4 9 9 15 6 2 0 
26 43 Win Denver Nuggets Home   44 14 26 3 6 12 13 8 13 2 2 
27 42 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home       30 17 23 1 1 7 7 7 3  
28 42 Win Seattle SuperSonics Home   46 15 28 2 5 10 10 12 5 3 3 
29 42 Win Indiana Pacers Home   42 15 24 2 2 10 10 20 5 3 2 
30 41 Win Detroit Pistons Home    17  4  3 3     
31 41 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home    15 27 1  10 10 14    
32 41   Win Atlanta Hawks Away   40 15 27 2 4 9 11 7 6 3 2 
33 41   Win Chicago Bulls Away   46 17 29 1 1 6 6 7 7 3 1 
34 41 Win Golden State Warriors Home   43 15 24 3 6 8 10 10 5 2 0 
35 41 Win New York Knicks Home   44 17 30 3 3 4 4 6 5 3 0 
36 41 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home   43 15 21 1 2 10 10 10 4 0 0 
37 40 Win Detroit Pistons Neutral        18  0  4 5     
38 40 Win Dallas Mavericks Away   44 16 20 0  8 8 10 9 0 1 
39 40 Lost Denver Nuggets Away   46 14 28 0 2 12 13 9 6 0 0 
40 40 Win New Jersey Nets Home   46 15 28 3 7 7 8 7 7 1 0 
41 40 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   39 14 24 3 7 9 10 12 5 2 1 
42 40 Win New Jersey Nets Home   42 17 27 3 5 3 4 8 13 2 0 
43 40 Lost Denver Nuggets Home   40 16 25 0 5 8 8 13 1 2 1 
44 40 Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   40 18 27 1 2 3 4 13 5 2 0 
45 40 Win Seattle SuperSonics Home   46 17 27 2 5 4 4 11 10 1 2 
46 40 Win Utah Jazz Home   41 16 30 1 2 7 7 8 5 2 0 
47 40 Win Miami Heat Home   40 14 23 2 5 10 10 6 9 1 0 

Playoffs

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 43 Win Detroit Pistons Home   43 17 33 0 1 9 9 13 5 1 0 
2 42 Win Detroit Pistons Home   40 14 26 0 1 14 15 10 6 0 1 
3 42   Win Milwaukee Bucks Away   56 13 23 3 5 13 15 7 8 0 2 
4 40 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home   43 14 25 1 2 11 12 7 3 3 2 
5 40 Win Milwaukee Bucks Home   44 13 23 1 1 13 13 11 7 4 1 

Game-winners
Regular season

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 28 Win Denver Nuggets Away    13    2 2     
2 25 Win Detroit Pistons Home    11    3 3     
3 20   Win Philadelphia 76ers Away   40 7 22   6 6 15 7   
4 38 Win Phoenix Suns Away    14 25   9 9     
5 13 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home    6 11 1  0 0     
6 48 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home    17 28 2  12 12     
7 32 Win Detroit Pistons Home    11 23 1  9 9     
8 47   Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   49 21 34 3 3 2 3 14 11 1 2 
9 27 Win Seattle SuperSonics Away   41 10 19 3 3 4 5 8 6 1 0 
10 29 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home   43 11 17 2 6 9 10 13 7 2 0 
11 47   Win Washington Bullets Away   53 19 29 1 2 8 10 8 7 2 0 
12 39 Win Dallas Mavericks Away   40 16 25 2 4 5 6 10 6 3 0 
13 27 Win Chicago Bulls Away   38 12 24 0 1 3 4 9 6 0 0 
14 10 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home   35 5 11 0 0 0 0 6 8 1 1 
15 27 Win Los Angeles Clippers Home   39 11 22 1 3 4 4 5 5 2 0 

Playoffs

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 23 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home    8    6 7     
2 34 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Away   42 11 17 0 1 12 14 14 7 1 0 

Career highs
Regular season

Stat High Opponent Date 
Points, game 60 Atlanta Hawks   
Points, half   37 Atlanta Hawks   
Points, quarter   24 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Points without a   free throw, quarter   19 Atlanta Hawks   
Consecutive points   16 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal percentage    
Field goals made 22 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goals made 22 vs. New York Knicks   
Field goals made, half   15 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goals made, half   15 vs. Washington Bullets   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Washington Bullets   
Field goal attempts 36 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal attempts 36 vs. Chicago Bulls   
Field goal attempts, half   23 Atlanta Hawks   
Free throws made, none missed    
Free throws made, one missed 16—17 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made 16 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throw attempts    
Three-point field goals made 7 vs. Dallas Mavericks   
Three-point field goals made 7 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Three-point field goal attempts 10 three times 
Rebounds 21 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Rebounds 21 at Los Angeles Lakers   
Rebounds 21 at Denver Nuggets   
Rebounds 21   at Washington Bullets   
Offensive rebounds    
Defensive rebounds 18 at Chicago Bulls   
Defensive rebounds 18 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Assists 17 at Golden State Warriors   
Assists 16 vs. Cleveland Cavaliers   
Steals 9 at Utah Jazz   
Steals 8   at New Jersey Nets   
Steals 8 vs. New Jersey Nets   
Blocked shots    
Turnovers 10 at New York Knicks   
Minutes played    

Playoffs

Stat High Opponent Date 
Points 43 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Points, half   30 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Points, quarter   24 vs. Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal percentage    
Field goals made 17 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Field goals made 16 vs. New York Knicks   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal attempts 33 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made, none missed 14—14 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made, one missed 14—15 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made 14 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made 14 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made, half   12 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Los Angeles Lakers   
Free throw attempts 15 at Los Angeles Lakers   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throw attempts 15 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goals made 5 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goal attempts 6 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goal attempts 6 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Rebounds 21 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Rebounds 21 vs. Houston Rockets   
Rebounds 21 vs. Houston Rockets   
Rebounds 21   at Los Angeles Lakers   
Offensive rebounds    
Defensive rebounds 19 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Assists 16 vs. New York Knicks   
Assists, half 11 vs. New York Knicks   
Steals 5 vs. Houston Rockets   
Steals 5 at Houston Rockets   
Steals 5 at New York Knicks   
Steals 5 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Blocked shots    
Turnovers 10 vs. Chicago Bulls   
Minutes played 56   at Milwaukee Bucks   

In popular culture

Bird has appeared in three movies, Blue Chips, released in 1994 by Paramount, the Warner Brothers film Space Jam with Michael Jordan and Bill Murray in 1996, and Celtic Pride with Dan Aykroyd, Daniel Stern, and Damon Wayans, which was also released in 1996. 
Bird's likeness has appeared in several video games. In One on One: Dr. J vs. Larry Bird, Bird plays opposite Julius Erving in a game of one-on-one. A sequel, Jordan vs Bird: One on One, was a 1988 basketball video game. In 2011, Bird was featured on the cover of NBA 2K12, alongside Magic Johnson and Michael Jordan. Bird is also playable character in the revamped NBA Jam. 
The band Dispatch has a song called "Just Like Larry" about Larry Bird, who is their hometown hero from his days as a member of the Boston Celtics. 
In a phone commercial when Larry Bird tells Tweety Bird that they are not related, Tweety not only comments on them having the same last name but that they "look an awful lot alike".
Larry Bird and Magic Johnson wrote a book together (with Jackie MacMullan) titled When The Game Was Ours.
In a commercial during Super Bowl XLIV, Dwight Howard and LeBron James challenge each other at trick shots for a McDonald's lunch. After they finish, clapping is heard, then the camera pans to the crowd and Bird says "Great show, guys. Thanks for lunch." Howard and James share a confused look. Howard asks, "Who was that?" James replies, "I have no idea." This refers to a McDonald's commercial from 1991 in which Bird and Michael Jordan have a trick shot contest, in which the winner got the lunch and the loser had to watch the winner eat. 
In October 2005, a man in Oklahoma City, Eric James Torpy, was convicted of shooting with intent to kill and robbery. He asked that his sentence be changed from 30 years imprisonment to 33 so that it would match Bird's jersey number. His request was granted. 
Twitter's logo is named Larry in honor of Larry Bird. 


See also 

List of National Basketball Association career scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career assists leaders
List of National Basketball Association career steals leaders
List of National Basketball Association career turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff assists leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff steals leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff free throw scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association players with most points in a game
List of National Basketball Association players with most steals in a game
List of NCAA Division I men's basketball players with 2000 points and 1000 rebounds
List of National Basketball Association season minutes leaders


References 
Further reading

 
 


External links 
 

 
 
 
Sportscentury's 30th greatest athlete of all time provided by ESPN.com
NBA.com: Where Legends Are Born
NBA History
CNN/Sports Illustrated: A Player for the Ages
1979 Oscar Robertson Trophy USBWA College Player of the Year
Videos of Larry Bird on mReplay.com
Larry Bird Statistics
Indiana Basketball Hall of Fame profile

 
  
DEFAULTSORT






















 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
