	Leslie Nielsen
 
 
Leslie William Nielsen, OC (11 February 1926 28 November 2010)    was a Canadian and naturalized American actor and comedian.     Nielsen appeared in more than one hundred films and 1,500 television programs over the span of his career, portraying more than 220 characters.    Born in Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada, Nielsen enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and worked as a disc jockey before receiving a scholarship to Neighborhood Playhouse. Making his television debut in 1948, he quickly expanded to over 50 television appearances two years later. Nielsen made his film debut in 1956, and began collecting his roles in dramas, westerns, and romance films between the 1950s and the 1970s. Nielsen's performance in the films Forbidden Planet and The Poseidon Adventure received positive reviews as a serious actor, although he is primarily known for his comedic roles during the 1980s and the early 1990s.Although Nielsen's acting career crossed a variety of genres in both television and films, his deadpan delivery in Airplane! marked a turning point in his career, one that would make him, in the words of film critic Roger Ebert, "the Olivier of spoofs."    Nielsen enjoyed further success with The Naked Gun film series, based on an earlier short-lived television series Police Squad! in which he also starred. Nielsen's portrayal of comedic characters seemingly oblivious to (and complicit in) their absurd surroundings gave him a reputation as a comedian.    In the final years of his life, Nielsen appeared in numerous spoof and parody films, many of which were met poorly by critics, but performed well in box office and home media releases. Nielsen married four times and had two daughters from his second marriage. Nielsen was recognized with a variety of awards throughout his career, and was inducted into the Canada and Hollywood Walks of Fame.
Early life
Nielsen was born on 11 February 1926 in Regina, Saskatchewan.    His mother, Mabel Elizabeth (née Davies), was a Welsh immigrant, and his father, Ingvard Eversen Nielsen, was a Danish-born Constable in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.         Nielsen had two brothers; his older brother, Erik Nielsen (1924–2008), was Deputy Prime Minister of Canada from 1984 to 1986.  Ingvard was a troubled man who beat his wife and sons, and Leslie longed to escape. As soon as he graduated from high school at 17, he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force, even though he was legally deaf (he wore hearing aids most of his life).    His half-uncle, Jean Hersholt, was an actor best known for his portrayal of Dr. Christian in the long-running radio series of the same name and the subsequent television series and films.     In a 1994 Boston Globe article, Nielsen explained, "I did learn very early that when I would mention my uncle, people would look at me as if I were the biggest liar in the world. Then I would take them home and show them 8-by-10 glossies, and things changed quite drastically. So I began to think that maybe this acting business was not a bad idea, much as I was very shy about it and certainly without courage regarding it. My uncle died not too long after I was in a position to know him. I regret that I had not a chance to know him better." Nielsen spent several years living in Fort Norman (now Tulita), Northwest Territories where his father was stationed with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.       At the age of 17, following his graduation from Victoria Composite High School in Edmonton, Nielsen enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and was trained as an aerial gunner during the latter part of World War II (but was too young to be fully trained or sent overseas).    He worked briefly as a disc jockey at a Calgary, Alberta radio station, before enrolling at the Lorne Greene Academy of Radio Arts, Toronto.     While studying in Toronto, Nielsen received a scholarship to the Neighborhood Playhouse. He noted, "I couldn't refuse, but I must say when you come from the land of the snow goose, the moose and wool to New York, you're bringing every ton of hayseed and country bumpkin that you packed. As long as I didn't open my mouth, I felt a certain security. But I always thought I was going to be unmasked: 'OK, pack your stuff.' 'Well, what's the matter?' 'We've discovered you have no talent; we're shipping you back to Canada.'"  He moved to New York City for his scholarship,  studying theater and music at the Neighborhood Playhouse, while performing in summer stock theatre.  Afterward, he attended the Actors Studio,    until making his first television appearance in 1948 on an episode of Studio One, alongside Charlton Heston,    for which he was paid US$75. 
Career
Early career 
Nielsen's career began in dramatic roles on television during what is known as "Television's Golden Age",  appearing in almost 50 live programs in 1950 alone.  Nielsen reported that for his salary that there "  was very little gold, we only got $75 or $100 per show."    His distinctive voice narrated several documentaries and commercials but, with a handful of exceptions, his early work as a dramatic actor was uneventful.  Hal Erickson of Allmovie noted, "...much of Nielsen's early work was undistinguished; he was merely a handsome leading man in an industry overstocked with handsome leading men."    In 1956 he made his feature film debut in the Michael Curtiz-directed musical film The Vagabond King.  In the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Nielsen pointed out that he remembers Curtiz as "a sadist, a charming sadist, but a sadist".  Nielsen would go on to call this film "The Vagabond Turkey".  Though the film was not a box office success, Nielsen caught the eye of producer Nicholas Nayfack who offered him an audition for a role in the science fiction film Forbidden Planet, resulting in Nielsen being signed to a long-term contract by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM).  
Forbidden Planet became an instant success,    and roles in other MGM films such as Ransom! (1956), The Opposite Sex (1956) and Hot Summer Night (1957) followed.  In 1957 he won the lead role opposite Debbie Reynolds in the romantic comedy Tammy and the Bachelor, which, as a Chicago Tribune critic wrote in 1998, made people consider Nielsen as both a dramatic actor and a handsome romantic lead.  However, dissatisfied with the quality of the films he was offered, calling the studios "  a Tiffany, which had forgotten how to make silver", Nielsen left MGM, but not before auditioning for the role of Messala in the 1959 historical piece Ben-Hur. Stephen Boyd was eventually given the role.     After leaving the studios, Nielsen landed the lead role in the Disney miniseries The Swamp Fox, as American Revolutionary War hero Francis Marion.  In a 1988 interview he reflected on the series, stating, "That was a great experience, because the Disney people didn't do their shows like everyone else, knocking out an episode a week.   We only had to do an episode a month, and the budgets were extremely high for TV at that time. We had location shooting rather than cheap studio backdrops, and very authentic costumes."  Eight episodes were produced and aired between 1959 and 1961.   His television appearances include parts in Justice, Alfred Hitchcock Presents, The Virginian, and The Wild Wild West. In 1961, he was the lead in a taut Los Angeles police drama called The New Breed. He guest starred in a 1964 episode of Daniel Boone with Fess Parker and, in a minor but credited role, Jay Silverheels. In 1968, he had a major role in the pilot film for the popular police series Hawaii Five-O, and later appeared in one of the seventh season episodes. In 1969, he had the leading role as a police officer in The Bold Ones: The Protectors.In 1972, Nielsen appeared as the ship's captain in the all-star disaster epic The Poseidon Adventure. He also starred in the William Girdler-directed 1977 action film Project: Kill. His last dramatic role before portraying mainly comedy roles was the 1979 Canadian disaster film City on Fire in which he played a corrupt mayor. In 1980, he guest starred as Sinclair on the CBS miniseries The Chisholms.
Airplane! and The Naked Gun 
Nielsen's supporting role in 1980's Airplane! was a major watershed in his career. The ethos of the movie, a parody of dramatic disaster films such as Zero Hour! and Airport, is largely based on building a comedy around actors who were then known exclusively for their dramatic roles (other stars included Robert Stack, Peter Graves, and Lloyd Bridges). Nielsen was the movie's linchpin, his deadpan delivery contrasting with the continual absurdity surrounding him. When asked, "Surely you can't be serious?", he responds with a curt, "I am serious. And don't call me Shirley." In several interviews he later reflected on the significance of the comedic line: "I thought it was amusing, but it never occurred to me that it was going to become a trademark. It's such a surprise...the thing comes out, people say, 'What did he say?!'"    Nielsen also stated that he was "...pleased and honored that [he] had a chance to deliver that line."  The comedic exchange was at #79 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.    The American Film Institute also included the film in its list of the top ten comedy films of all time.   
Critics praised the film, which also proved to be a success with audiences.    The film's directors, Jim Abrahams, David Zucker, and Jerry Zucker, chose Nielsen for the role based on his ability to play "a fish in water", stating that "You could have cast funny people and done it with everybody winking, goofing off, and silly...we wanted people to be oblivious to the comedy."  For Nielsen, Airplane! marked a shift from dramatic roles to a new focus on deadpan comedy. When it was suggested that his role in Airplane! was against type, Nielsen protested that he had "always been cast against type before," and that comedy was what he always really wanted to do.   The directors, interested in the success of the new comedy, decided to bring a similar style of comedy to television, casting Nielsen in the lead role in their new series, Police Squad!. The series introduced Nielsen as Frank Drebin, the stereotypical police officer modeled after serious characters in earlier police TV series.Police Squads opening sequence was based on the 1950s cop show M Squad, (which starred Lee Marvin), which opened with footage of a police car roving through an after-dark urban setting with a big band playing a jazz theme song in the background. The voice-over and the show's organization into "acts" with an epilogue was homage to Quinn Martin police dramas including The Fugitive, The Streets of San Francisco, Barnaby Jones, The F.B.I., and Cannon. Much like in Airplane!, Nielsen portrayed a serious character whose one-liners appeared accidental next to the pratfalls and sight gags around him. Although the show was quickly canceled, lasting only six episodes after being juggled between time slots, Nielsen received an Emmy Award  nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series.   Non-comedic roles included Prom Night (1980) and Creepshow (1982), both horror films. His last dramatic role was as Allen Green, a violent john killed in self-defense by Barbra Streisand's prostitute character, Claudia Draper, in Martin Ritt's courtroom drama Nuts (1987).Six years after the cancellation of Police Squad!, its directors decided to make a feature length version for theaters. Titled The Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!. The film returned Nielsen to his role as Frank Drebin. It involved a comical scheme of a ruthless drug kingpin using hypnosis in an attempt to assassinate Queen Elizabeth II. Drebin, like the doctor in Airplane!, seemed unaware of the absurdity around him even when unintentionally contributing toward it. Nielsen later said in an interview that he had done many of his own stunts, "You have an idea of how you're going to do something, and it's your vision... unless you do it, it really doesn't stand a chance."  This movie grossed over $78 million at the box office and was well received by critics.       Ebert's 3½–star review (out of four) noted, "You laugh, and then you laugh at yourself for laughing."   The Naked Gun spawned two sequels: The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear (1991) and Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult (1994). Naked Gun 2½ grossed more than the original, with $86,930,400, while Naked Gun 33⅓ grossed $51,132,600 in receipts.       Nielsen remained open to the prospects of acting in a fourth Naked Gun film, although he doubted that it would ever be produced—"I don't think so," he said in 2005. "If there hasn't been one by now, I doubt it. I think it would be wonderful."   Nielsen briefly appeared on the World Wrestling Federation program in the summer of 1994 on WWF Monday Night Raw; capitalizing on his Frank Drebin character, Nielsen (and George Kennedy) were hired as "super-sleuths" to unravel the mystery of The Undertaker who had disappeared at January's Royal Rumble event. At SummerSlam 1994, in a Naked Gun parody, they were hot on the case (in fact, they were literally standing on a case). Although they did not actually find The Undertaker, the case had been closed (the literal case had been shut) and thus, they solved the mystery.   
Later comediesNielsen attempted a variety of similar roles with none achieving the prominence of Frank Drebin. These films mostly emulated the style of The Naked Gun series with varying degrees of critical and commercial success: many were panned by critics and most performed poorly. In 1986, Nielsen played against recent type as a dramatic (and unsympathetic) character in the comedy, Soul Man. In 1990, Nielsen also appeared as a Frank Drebin-style character in a series of advertisements in the United Kingdom for Red Rock Cider.Although The Naked Gun series parodied police dramas in general, Nielsen's later parody films focused on specific targets. Critics panned Repossessed (1990) and 2001: A Space Travesty (2001), parodies of The Exorcist and 2001: A Space Odyssey, respectively. Both films attempted the absurdist comedy Nielsen is recognized for, but were poorly received.       Even a leading role in a Mel Brooks comic horror parody, Dracula: Dead and Loving It, failed to generate much box office excitement, although it did gain somewhat of a following on its later release to video. Both 1996's Spy Hard and 1998's Wrongfully Accused, a parody of James Bond films and The Fugitive, respectively, received more popularity on home video but were not well received by critics.      His attempt at children's comedies met with additional criticism. Surf Ninjas (1993) and Mr. Magoo (1997) faced scathing reviews. Several critics were disappointed that Nielsen's role in Surf Ninjas was only "an extended cameo" and film critic Chris Hicks recommended that viewers "...avoid any comedy that features Leslie Nielsen outside of the Naked Gun series."       Jeff Miller of the Houston Chronicle panned Mr. Magoo, a live action remake of the 1950s cartoon, by saying, "I'm supposed to suggest how the film might be better but I can't think of anything to say other than to make the film again."   Nielsen's first major slapstick success since The Naked Gun came in a supporting role in Scary Movie 3 (2003). His appearance as President Harris proved popular enough for a second appearance in its sequel, Scary Movie 4 (2006). This became the first time Nielsen reprised a character since his appearances as Frank Drebin. In one scene, Nielsen appeared almost fully nude, and one critic referred to the scene as putting "the 'scary' in Scary Movie 4."   Nielsen also hosted a series of instructional golf videos beginning with 1993's Bad Golf Made Easier. The videos were not serious, instead combining absurdist comedy with golf techniques. The series were popular enough to spawn two additional sequels, Bad Golf My Way (1994) and Stupid Little Golf Video (1997). Nielsen also co-wrote a fictional autobiography titled The Naked Truth. The book portrayed Nielsen as a popular actor with a long history of prestigious films.
Final years
Even in his eighties, Nielsen continued to have an active career. He performed serious roles on screen and stage (such as his one-man theatre show Darrow, in which he played Clarence Darrow), as well as providing voice-overs and on-camera appearances for commercials; cartoons like Zeroman where he had the leading role/voice; children's shows, such as Pumper Pups, which he narrated, in addition to comedic film roles. The sibling relationship with his elder brother, the Honourable Erik Nielsen, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, served as the premise of an HBO mockumentary entitled The Canadian Conspiracy in which Leslie Nielsen appeared, along with other prominent Canadian-born media personalities. He was a celebrity contestant on CBS's Gameshow Marathon, where he played The Price Is Right, Let's Make a Deal, Beat the Clock, and Press Your Luck for charity. Beginning in February 2007, Nielsen began playing a small role as a doctor in the humorous yet educational television show Doctor*Ology. The show chronicles real-life medical techniques and technology, and airs on the Discovery Channel. In an interview, Nielsen admitted his admiration for the doctors on the show: "There are any number of things that you think about when you ponder if you hadn't been an actor, what would you be, and I've always said I'd like to be an astronaut or a doctor. I have such admiration for doctors. I just don't know how you go around to thank them enough for coming up with the world's most remarkable new discoveries."   In 2007, Nielsen starred in the drama Music Within. In 2008, he portrayed a version of Uncle Ben for Superhero Movie, a spoof of superhero films. He then appeared in the 2008 parody film An American Carol, which David Zucker directed, produced, and co-wrote. He appeared in the 2009 parody Stan Helsing. Nielsen portrayed the Doctor in the Spanish horror comedy Spanish Movie,  a spoof comedy like Scary Movie, but making fun of popular Spanish films. Nielsen appeared in over 100 films and 1,500 television programs over the span of his career, portraying over 220 characters.      
Personal life Nielsen married four times: Monica Boyar (1950–1956), Alisande Ullman (1958–1973), Brooks Oliver (1981–1983) and Barbaree Earl (2001–2010).       Nielsen had two daughters from his second marriage, Maura and Thea Nielsen. Nielsen was a fan of golf, and he often played it in his free time.    Nielsen joked about his view on golf, "I have no goals or ambition. I do, however, wish to work enough to maintain whatever celebrity status I have so that they will continue to invite me to golf tournaments."  Nielsen's interest in the sport led him to star in several comedic instructional films.Nielsen stated in several interviews that he had a few medical problems such as hearing impairment.    He was legally deaf and wore hearing aids for most of his life.  Because of this impairment, he publicly supported the Better Hearing Institute.   
DeathIn November 2010, Nielsen was admitted to a Fort Lauderdale, Florida hospital for treatment of pneumonia. On 28 November, Doug Nielsen, Nielsen's nephew, announced to the CJOB radio station that Nielsen had died in his sleep, due to complications from pneumonia, around 5:30 pm EST, surrounded by family and friends.          He was interred in Fort Lauderdale's Evergreen Cemetery. As a final bit of humor, Nielsen chose "Let 'er Rip" as his epitaph. 
AchievementsAmong his numerous awards, in 1995 Leslie Nielsen received UCLA's Jack Benny Award for his comedic roles.  In 1988, he became the 1,884th personality to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6541 Hollywood Blvd.    In 2001 he was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame.    The following year he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, although he was also a naturalized U.S. citizen.  With his American status, he maintained his Canadian heritage: "There's no way you can be a Canadian and think you can lose it ... Canadians are a goodly group. They are very aware of caring and helping."  On 19 May 2005, during the centennial gala of his birth province, Saskatchewan, Leslie Nielsen was introduced to HM Queen Elizabeth II.   In 1997, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him. On 20 February 2002, Nielsen was named an honorary citizen of West Virginia and an "Ambassador of Mountain State Goodwill". Nielsen visited the state many times to speak and visit friends.  In 2003, in honor of Nielsen, Grant MacEwan College named its school of communications after him.    Also in 2003, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists awarded him the ACTRA Award of Excellence. 
Filmography
Films

Year Film Role Other notes 
1955  The Battle of Gettysburg  Narrator   
1956  Ransom!  Charlie Telfer  Film debut, as an actor 
Forbidden Planet  Commander John J. Adams   
The Vagabond King  Thibault   
The Opposite Sex  Steve Hilliard   
1957  Hot Summer Night  William Joel Partain   
Tammy and the Bachelor  Peter Brent   
1958  The Sheepman  Col. Stephen Bedford / Johnny Bledsoe   
1960  Route 66 (TV series)    
1964  See How They Run  Elliot Green  First television movie. 
Night Train to Paris  Alan Holiday   
1965  Dark Intruder  Brett Kingsford   
Harlow  Richard Manley   
1966  The Plainsman  Col. George Armstrong Custer   
Beau Geste  Lieutenant De Ruse   
1967  Code Name: Heraclitus  Fryer   
The Reluctant Astronaut  Major Fred Gifford   
Gunfight in Abilene  Grant Evers   
Rosie!  Cabot Shaw   
1968  How to Steal the World  General Maximilian Harmon  The Man from U.N.C.L.E. film. 
Counterpoint  Victor Rice   
Dayton's Devils Frank Dayton   
Companions in Nightmare  Dr. Neesden   
1969  Trial Run  Jason Harkness   
Deadlock  Lieutenant Sam Danforth   
How to Commit Marriage  Phil Fletcher   
Change of Mind  Sherrif Webb   
1970  Night Slaves  Sherrif Henshaw   
The Aquarians  Official   
Hauser's Memory Joseph Slaughter   
1971  Incident In San Francisco  Lieutenant Brubaker   
Four Rode Out  Mr. Brown   
They Call It Murder Frank Antrim   
1972  The Poseidon Adventure  Captain Harrison   
1973  ...And Millions Die!  Jack Gallagher   
Snatched  Bill Sutting   
Amanda Fallon  Mr. Cummings   
The Return of Charlie Chan Alexander Hadrachi   
1975  Can Ellen Be Saved  Arnold Lindsey   
Threshold: The Blue Angels Experience  Narrator   
1976  Grand Jury  John Williams   
Project Kill  Jonathan Trevor   
Brinks: The Great Robbery  Agent Norman Houston   
1977  Sixth and Main  John Doe   
Day of the Animals  Paul Jenson   
Viva Knievel!  Stanley Millard   
The Kentucky Fried Movie  Man in Feel-O-Rama Movie  Uncredited cameo; Feel-O-Rama segment. 
The Amsterdam Kill  Riley Knight   
1978  Little Mo  Nelson Fisher   
1979  Institute for Revenge  Counselor Hollis Barnes   
The Albertans  Don MacIntosh   
Riel  Major Crozier   
City on Fire  Mayor William Dudley   
1980  OHMS  Governor   
Airplane!  Dr. Rumack  First comedy role. 
Prom Night  Mr. Raymond Hammond   
1981  A Choice of Two  Unknown   
1982  Twilight Theater  Various Characters   
Foxfire Light  Reece Morgan   
Wrong Is Right  Mallory   
Creepshow  Richard Vickers  Something To Tide You Over segment. 
1983  Prime Time  Unknown   
The Night the Bridge Fell Down  Paul Warren   
Cave-In!  Joseph 'Joe' Johnson   
The Creature Wasn't Nice (Spaceship)  Capt. Jamieson   
1985  Murder Among Friends  Unknown   
Reckless Disregard  Bob Franklin   
Blade in Hong Kong  Harry Ingersoll   
Striker's Mountain  Jim McKay   
1986  The Patriot  Admiral Frazer   
Soul Man  Mr. Dunbar   
1987  Nightstick  Thad Evans   
Nuts   Allen Green  Final non-comedy role. 
Home Is Where the Hart Is  Sherrif Nashville Schwartz   
1988  Dangerous Curves  Greg Krevske   
The Railway Dragon  Narrator  First animated film. 
The Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!  Lt. Frank Drebin  First starring role. 
1990  Repossessed  Father Jebedaiah Mayii   
1991  All I Want for Christmas Santa Claus  Family holiday film. 
The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear  Lt. Frank Drebin   
Chance of a Lifetime  Lloyd Dixon   
1993  Digger  Arthur Evrensel   
Surf Ninjas  Colonel Chi   
1994  S.P.Q.R.: 2,000 and a Half Years Ago  Lucio Cinico   
Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult  Lt. Frank Drebin   
1995  Mr. Willowby's Christmas Tree  Willowby's butler   
Rent-a-Kid  Harry Haber   
Dracula: Dead and Loving It  Count Dracula   
1996  Spy Hard  Dick Steele, Agent WD-40   
1997  Mr. Magoo  Mr. Magoo  
1998  Safety Patrol  Mr. Penn   
Family Plan  Harry Haber   
Harvey  Dr. Chumley   
Wrongfully Accused  Ryan Harrison   
1999  Pirates 4-D  Captain Lucky  4D Cinema Show presented at various Busch Gardens amusement parks. 
2000  Santa Who?  Santa Claus   
2001: A Space Travesty  Marshal Richard 'Dick' Dix   
2001  Camouflage  Jack Potter   
Kevin of the North (Chilly Dogs)  Clive Thornton   
2002  Men with Brooms  Gordon Cutter   
2003  Scary Movie 3  President Harris   
Noël Noël  English Narrator   
2006  Scary Movie 4  President Harris   
2007  Music Within  Bill Austin   
2008  Superhero Movie  Uncle Albert   
An American Carol  Grampa / Himself   
Slap Shot 3: The Junior League  Mayor of Charlestown   
2009  Spanish Movie  Doctor   
Stan Helsing  Kay   
2011  Stonerville  Producer   
2012  The Waterman Movie  Ready Espanosa  Voice acting  

Television 

Year Title Role Other Notes 
1953  Jukebox Jury  Himself   
1958–1961  Alfred Hitchcock Presents  Lloyd Ashley & DA Rudolph Cox  Two episodes 
1959  The Swamp Fox  Colonel Francis Marion   
1960  Thriller  Alan Patterson (lead role) Episode "The Twisted Image" 
1960, 1964 Wagon Train  Jeremy Dow, Brian Conlin Two episodes 
1960  The Untouchables  Tom Sebring Episode "Three Thousand Suspects" 
1961  The New Breed  Lt. Price Adams  Regular 
1963  Channing  Professor Paul Stafford  Single episode 
1963–1964  The Fugitive (TV series)  Martin C. Rowland & Harold Cheyney Two episodes 
1964  Your First Impression  As himself  Single episode 
1964  The Alfred Hitchcock Hour Steven Grainger  Single episode 
1964–1969  The Virginian  Ben Stratton  Five episodes 
1965 Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea  Capt. Wayne Adams  One episode "The Creature" 
1965   Peyton Place  Vincent and Kenneth Marham (twins)  19 episodes 
1967  Bonanza  Sheriff Paul Rowan  One episode 
1968  The Man from U.N.C.L.E.  General Maximillian Harmon  Single episode "The Seven Wonders of the World Affair Pt 1 & 2" 
1969  The Bold Ones: The Protectors  Deputy Police Chief Sam Danforth  Seven episodes 
1969–1974  Hawaii Five-O  Brent & Colonel Faraday  Two episodes 
1971–1975  Columbo  Peter Hamilton & Geronimo  Two episodes 
1971  Bearcats!  Col. Ted Donovan  Single episode 
1971  Night Gallery  The Phantom, Col. Dennis Malloy  Two episodes: "Phantom of What Opera?" and "A Question of Fear" 
1973  M*A*S*H  Col. Buzz Brighton  Episode "The Ringbanger" 
1973–1974  The Streets of San Francisco  Ofc. Joe Landers, Insp. John T. Connor, & Big Jake Wilson  Three episodes 
1974  Cannon  Eric Strauss  Single episode 
1974  Kojak  Michael Hagar  Single episode "Loser Takes All" 
1975  Kung Fu  Vincent Corbino  Four episodes 
1975–1976  S.W.A.T.  Larry Neal/Vince Richie  Three episodes 
1979  Backstairs at the White House  Ike Hoover  Three episodes 
1980  The Littlest Hobo  Mayor Chester Montgomery  Episode "Romiet and Julio" 
1982  Police Squad!  Det. Frank Drebin  Nominated for an Emmy Award 
1984  Shaping Up  Buddy Fox   
1985–1986  Murder, She Wrote  Captain Daniels & David Everett  Two episodes 
1987  Highway to Heaven  Richard R. Benson   
1988  Who's the Boss?  Max   
1988  Day By Day  Jack Harper  One episode, nominated for an Emmy Award 
1989  Saturday Night Live  Himself  Single episode 
1992  The Golden Girls  Lucas Hollingsworth  Series finale 
1993  Herman's Head  God  Single episode 
1994–1999  Due South  Sgt. Buck Frobisher  Four episodes 
1994–1996, 2001–2002  Katie and Orbie  Narrator   
1995  Mr. Willowby's Christmas Tree  Mr. Willowby's Butler, Baxter  Television Christmas special 
2000  Santa Who?  Santa Claus  Television film 
2001  Liocracy  Terrence Brynne McKennie   
2003  Chilly Beach  Santa Claus  Single episode 
2004  Zeroman  Les Mutton / Zeroman   
2007  Doctor*Ology  Himself, Host   
Lipshitz Saves the World  Lipshitz's mentor  Pilot 
Robson Arms  Cado Vasco  

Video

1993: Bad Golf Made Easier
1994: Bad Golf My Way
1997: Stupid Little Golf Video
1997: National Geographic Video: The Savage Garden
Nielsen also appeared in a promotional video for Layman Allen's mathematics game called "Equations" and in the Seaworld San Antonio Summer Nights 4-D show "Pirates 4-D".


Writing

1993: The Naked Truth


References 
External links 
 
 

 
CBC Digital Archives – Leslie and Erik Nielsen laugh it up
  
DEFAULTSORT






























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Josquin des Prez
Josquin des Prez [Josquin Lebloitte dit Desprez] ( ; c. 1450/1455 – 27 August 1521), often referred to simply as Josquin, was a Franco-Flemish composer of the Renaissance. He is also known as Josquin Desprez and Latinized as Josquinus Pratensis, alternatively Jodocus Pratensis, although he himself expressed his preferred spelling of his name, Josquin des Prez, in an acrostic in his motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix.   He was the most famous European composer between Guillaume Dufay and Palestrina, and is usually considered to be the central figure of the Franco-Flemish School. Josquin is widely considered by music scholars to be the first master of the high Renaissance style of polyphonic vocal music that was emerging during his lifetime.During the 16th century, Josquin gradually acquired the reputation as the greatest composer of the age, his mastery of technique and expression universally imitated and admired. Writers as diverse as Baldassare Castiglione and Martin Luther wrote about his reputation and fame; theorists such as Heinrich Glarean and Gioseffo Zarlino held his style as that best representing perfection.  He was so admired that many anonymous compositions were attributed to him by copyists, probably to increase their sales.  More than 370 works are attributed to him;  it was only after the advent of modern analytical scholarship that some of these mistaken attributions have been challenged, on the basis of stylistic features and manuscript evidence. Yet in spite of Josquin's colossal reputation, which endured until the beginning of the Baroque era and was revived in the 20th century, his biography is shadowy, and we know next to nothing about his personality. The only surviving work which may be in his own hand is a graffito on the wall of the Sistine Chapel, and only one contemporary mention of his character is known, in a letter to Duke Ercole I of Ferrara. The lives of dozens of minor composers of the Renaissance are better documented than the life of Josquin. Josquin wrote both sacred and secular music, and in all of the significant vocal forms of the age, including masses, motets, chansons and frottole. During the 16th century, he was praised for both his supreme melodic gift and his use of ingenious technical devices. In modern times, scholars have attempted to ascertain the basic details of his biography, and have tried to define the key characteristics of his style to correct misattributions, a task that has proved difficult, as Josquin liked to solve compositional problems in different ways in successive compositions—sometimes he wrote in an austere style devoid of ornamentation, and at other times he wrote music requiring considerable virtuosity.  Heinrich Glarean wrote in 1547 that Josquin was not only a "magnificent virtuoso" (the Latin can be translated also as "show-off") but capable of being a "mocker", using satire effectively.  While the focus of scholarship in recent years has been to remove music from the "Josquin canon" (including some of his most famous pieces) and to reattribute it to his contemporaries, the remaining music represents some of the most famous and enduring of the Renaissance. Sherr, p. 10. 
Life

Birth and early careerLittle is known for certain of Josquin's early life. Much is inferential and speculative, though numerous clues have emerged from his works and the writings of contemporary composers, theorists, and writers of the next several generations. Josquin was born in the area controlled by the Dukes of Burgundy, and was possibly born either in Hainaut (modern-day Belgium), or immediately across the border in modern-day France, since several times in his life he was classified legally as a Frenchman (for instance, when he made his will). Josquin was long mistaken for a man with a similar name, Josquin de Kessalia, born around the year 1440, who sang in Milan from 1459 to 1474, dying in 1498. More recent scholarship has shown that Josquin des Prez was born around 1450 or a few years later, and did not go to Italy until the early 1480s.Around 1466, perhaps on the death of his father, Josquin was named by his uncle and aunt, Gilles Lebloitte dit Desprez and Jacque Banestonne, as their heir. Their will gives Josquin's actual surname as Lebloitte. According to Matthews and Merkley, "des Prez" was a nickname. According to an account by Claude Hémeré, a friend and librarian of Cardinal Richelieu whose evidence dates as late as 1633, and who used the records of the collegiate church of Saint-Quentin,  Josquin became a choirboy at Saint-Quentin, probably around 1460, and was in charge of its music. Doubt has been cast on the accuracy of Hémeré's account, however. Macey et al., §1.  He may have studied counterpoint under Ockeghem, whom he greatly admired throughout his life: this is suggested both by the testimony of Gioseffo Zarlino and Lodovico Zacconi, writing later in the 16th century, and by Josquin's eloquent lament on the death of Ockeghem in 1497, Nymphes des bois/Requiem aeternam, based on the poem by Jean Molinet.  All records from Saint-Quentin were destroyed in 1669; however the cathedral there was a center of music-making for the entire area, and in addition was an important center of royal patronage. Both Jean Mouton and Loyset Compère were buried there, and it is certainly possible that Josquin acquired his later connections with the French royal chapel through early experiences at Saint-Quentin.The first definite record of his employment is dated 19 April 1477, and it shows that he was a singer at the chapel of René, Duke of Anjou, in Aix-en-Provence. He remained there at least until 1478. No certain records of his movements exist for the period from March 1478 until 1483, but if he remained in the employ of René he would have transferred to Paris in 1481 along with the rest of the chapel. One of Josquin's early motets, Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo, suggests a direct connection with Louis XI, who was king during this time. In 1483 Josquin returned to Condé to claim his inheritance from his aunt and uncle, who may have been killed by the army of Louis XI in May 1478, when they besieged the town, locked the population into the church, and burned them alive. Macey et al.,  . 
MilanThe period of 1480 to 1482 has puzzled biographers: some contradictory evidence exists, suggesting either that Josquin was still in France, or was already in the service of the Sforza family, specifically with Ascanio Sforza, who had been banished from Milan and resided temporarily in Ferrara or Naples. Residence in Ferrara in the early 1480s could explain the Missa Hercules dux Ferrariae, composed for Ercole d'Este, but which stylistically does not fit with the usual date of 1503–4 when Josquin was known to be in Ferrara. Alternatively it has been suggested that Josquin spent some of that time in Hungary, based on a mid-16th century Roman document describing the Hungarian court in those years, and including Josquin as one of the musicians present. In either 1483 or 1484 Josquin is known to have been in the service of the Sforza family in Milan. While in their employ, he made one or more trips to Rome, and possibly also to Paris; while in Milan he made the acquaintance of Franchinus Gaffurius, who was maestro di cappella of the cathedral there. He was in Milan again in 1489, after a possible period of travel; but he left that year.
RomeFrom 1489 to 1495 Josquin was a member of the papal choir, first under Pope Innocent VIII, and later under the Borgia pope Alexander VI. He may have gone there as part of a singer exchange with Gaspar van Weerbeke, who went back to Milan at the same time. While there, he may have been the one who carved his name into the wall of the Sistine Chapel; a "JOSQUINJ" was recently revealed by workers restoring the chapel. Since it was traditional for singers to carve their names into the walls, and hundreds of names were inscribed there during the period from the 15th to the 18th centuries, it is considered highly likely that the graffiti is by Josquin – and if so, it would be his only surviving autograph.  Josquin's mature style evolved during this period; as in Milan he had absorbed the influence of light Italian secular music, in Rome he refined his techniques of sacred music. Several of his motets have been dated to the years he spent at the papal chapel.
Departure from Rome; Milan and FranceAround 1498 Josquin most likely re-entered the service of the Sforza family, on the evidence of a pair of letters between the Gonzaga and Sforza families.  He probably did not stay in Milan long, for in 1499 Louis XII captured Milan in his invasion of northern Italy and imprisoned Josquin's former employers. Around this time Josquin most likely returned to France, although documented details of his career around the turn of the 16th century are lacking. Prior to departing Italy he most likely wrote one of his most famous secular compositions, the frottola El grillo, as well as In te Domine speravi ("I have placed my hope in you, Lord"), based on Psalm 30. The latter composition may have been a veiled reference to the religious reformer Girolamo Savonarola, who had been burned at the stake in Florence in 1498, and for whom Josquin seems to have had a special reverence; the text was the Dominican friar's favorite psalm, a meditation on which he left incomplete in prison prior to his execution. Some of Josquin's compositions, such as the instrumental Vive le roy, have been tentatively dated to the period around 1500 when he was in France. A motet, Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo ("Remember thy promise unto thy servant"), was, according to Heinrich Glarean writing in the Dodecachordon of 1547, composed as a gentle reminder to the king to keep his promise of a benefice to Josquin, which he had forgotten to keep. According to Glarean's story, it worked: the court applauded, and the king gave Josquin his benefice. Upon receiving it, Josquin reportedly wrote a motet on the text Benefecisti servo tuo, Domine ("Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant") to show his gratitude to the king. 
FerraraJosquin probably remained in the service of Louis XII until 1503, when Duke Ercole I of Ferrara hired him for the chapel there.  One of the rare mentions of Josquin's personality survives from this time. Prior to hiring Josquin, one of Duke Ercole's assistants recommended that he hire Heinrich Isaac instead, since Isaac was easier to get along with, more companionable, was more willing to compose on demand, and would cost significantly less (120 ducats vs. 200). Ercole, however, chose Josquin. While in Ferrara, Josquin wrote some of his most famous compositions, including the austere, Savonarola-influenced Miserere,  which became one of the most widely-distributed motets of the 16th century; the utterly contrasting, virtuoso motet Virgo salutiferi;  and possibly the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae, which is written on a cantus firmus derived from the musical letters in the Duke's name, a technique known as soggetto cavato.Josquin did not stay in Ferrara long. An outbreak of the plague in the summer of 1503 prompted the evacuation of the Duke and his family, as well as two thirds of the citizens, and Josquin left by April of the next year, possibly also to escape the plague. His replacement, Jacob Obrecht, died of the plague in the summer of 1505,  to be replaced by Antoine Brumel in 1506, who stayed until the disbanding of the chapel in 1510.
Retirement to Condé-sur-l'EscautJosquin went directly from Ferrara to his home region of Condé-sur-l'Escaut, southeast of Lille on the present-day border between Belgium and France, becoming provost of the collegiate church of Notre-Dame on 3 May 1504, a large musical establishment that he headed for the rest of his life. Sherr, p. 16.  While the chapter at Bourges Cathedral asked him to become master of the choirboys there in 1508, it is not known how he responded, and there is no record of his having been employed there; most scholars presume he remained in Condé. During the last two decades of his life, Josquin's fame spread abroad along with his music. The newly-developed technology of printing made wide dissemination of his music possible, and Josquin was the favorite of the first printers: one of Petrucci's first publications, and the earliest surviving print of music by a single composer, was a book of Josquin's masses which he printed in Venice in 1502. This publication was successful enough that Petrucci published two further volumes of Josquin's masses, in 1504 and 1514, and reissued them several times. On his death-bed Josquin asked that he be listed on the rolls as a foreigner, so that his property would not pass to the Lords and Ladies of Condé.  This bit of evidence has been used to show that he was French by birth. Additionally, he left an endowment for the performance of his late motet, Pater noster/Ave Maria, at all general processions in the town when they passed in front of his house, stopping to place a wafer on the marketplace altar to the Holy Virgin. Pater noster may have been his last work. 
Music

OverviewJosquin lived during a transitional stage in music history. Musical styles were changing rapidly, in part owing to the movement of musicians between different regions of Europe.  Many northern musicians moved to Italy, the heart of the Renaissance, attracted by the Italian nobility's patronage of the arts; while in Italy, these composers were influenced by the native Italian styles, and often brought those ideas with them back to their homelands. The sinuous musical lines of the Ockeghem generation, the contrapuntal complexity of the Netherlanders, and the homophonic textures of the Italian lauda and secular music began to merge into a unified style; indeed Josquin was to be the leading figure in this musical process, which eventually resulted in the formation of an international musical language, of which the most famous composers included Palestrina and Lassus. Noble, Grove (1980) Josquin likely learned his craft in his home region in the North, in France, and then in Italy when he went to Milan and Rome. His early sacred works emulate the contrapuntal complexity and ornamented, melismatic lines of Ockeghem and his contemporaries, but at the same time he was learning his contrapuntal technique he was acquiring an Italianate idiom for his secular music: after all, he was surrounded by Italian popular music in Milan. By the end of his long creative career, which spanned approximately 50 productive years, he had developed a simplified style in which each voice of a polyphonic composition exhibited free and smooth motion, and close attention was paid to clear setting of text as well as clear alignment of text with musical motifs. While other composers were influential on the development of Josquin's style, especially in the late 15th century, he himself became the most influential composer in Europe, especially after the development of music printing, which was concurrent with the years of his maturity and peak output. This event made his influence even more decisive than it might otherwise have been.Many "modern" musical compositional practices were being born in the era around 1500. Josquin made extensive use of "motivic cells" in his compositions, short, easily-recognizable melodic fragments which passed from voice to voice in a contrapuntal texture, giving it an inner unity. This is a basic organizational principle in music which has been practiced continuously from approximately 1500 until the present day. Josquin wrote in all of the important forms current at the time, including masses, motets, chansons, and frottole. He even contributed to the development of a new form, the motet-chanson, of which he left at least three examples. In addition, some of his pieces were probably intended for instrumental performance.Each area of his output can be further subdivided by form or by hypothetical period of composition. Since dating Josquin's compositions is particularly problematic, with scholarly consensus only achieved on a minority of works, discussion here is by type.
Masses
Josquin wrote towards the end of the period in which the mass was the predominant form of sacred composition in Europe. The mass, as it had developed through the 15th century, was a long, multi-section form, with opportunities for large-scale structure and organization not possible in the other forms such as the motet. Josquin wrote some of the most famous examples of the genre, most using some kind of cyclic organization.He wrote masses using the following general techniques, although there is considerable overlap between techniques in individual compositions:

cantus firmus mass, in which a pre-existing tune appeared, mostly unchanged, in one voice of the texture, with the other voices being more or less freely composed;
paraphrase mass, in which a pre-existing tune was used freely in all voices, and in many variations;
parody mass, in which a pre-existing multi-voice song appeared in whole or in part, with material from all voices in use, not just the tune;
soggetto cavato, or solmization mass, in which the tune is drawn from the syllables of a name or phrase (for example "la sol fa re mi" — A, G, F, D, E — based on the syllables of Lascia fare mi ("leave me alone", a phrase used by an unknown patron, in a context around which much legend has arisen).
canon, in which an entire mass is based on canonic techniques, and no pre-existing material has been identified. 

Most of these techniques, particularly paraphrase and parody, become standardized during the first half of the 16th century; Josquin was very much a pioneer, and what was perceived as mixing of these techniques by later observers was actually the process by which they were created. Josquin was fond of canonic techniques, as were many other composers of his generation, and canon appears in all of his masses, sometimes to the exclusion of other structural devices.
Cantus-firmus massesPrior to Josquin's mature period, the most common technique for writing masses was the cantus firmus, a technique which had been in use already for most of the 15th century. It was the technique that Josquin used earliest in his career, with the Missa L'ami Baudichon, possibly his first mass.  This mass is based on a secular – indeed ribald – tune similar to "Three Blind Mice". That basing a mass on such a source was an accepted procedure is evident from the existence of the mass in Sistine Chapel part-books copied during the papacy of Julius II (1503 to 1513). Josquin's most famous cantus-firmus masses are the two based on the L'homme armé tune, which was the favorite tune for mass composition of the entire Renaissance. The earlier of the two, Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales, is a technical tour-de-force on the tune, containing numerous mensuration canons and contrapuntal display. It was by far the most famous of all his masses.  The second, Missa L'homme armé sexti toni, is a "fantasia on the theme of the armed man."  While based on a cantus firmus, it is also a paraphrase mass, for fragments of the tune appear in all voices. Technically it is almost restrained, compared to the other L'homme armé mass, until the closing Agnus Dei, which contains a complex canonic structure including a rare retrograde canon, around which other voices are woven. 
Paraphrase massesThe paraphrase technique differs from the cantus-firmus technique in that the source material, though it still consists of a monophonic original, is embellished, often with ornaments. As in the cantus-firmus technique, the source tune may appear in many voices of the mass.Several of Josquin's masses feature the paraphrase technique, and they include some of his most famous work. The relatively early Missa Ave maris stella, which probably dates from his years in the Sistine Chapel choir, paraphrases the Marian antiphon of the same name; it is also one of his shortest masses.  The late Missa de Beata Virgine paraphrases plainchants in praise of the Virgin Mary; it is a Lady Mass, a votive mass for Saturday performance, and was his most popular mass in the 16th century.  By far the most famous of Josquin's masses using the technique, and one of the most famous mass settings of the entire era, was the Missa pange lingua, based on the hymn by Thomas Aquinas for the Vespers of Corpus Christi. It was probably the last mass that Josquin composed.  This mass is an extended fantasia on the tune, using the melody in all voices and in all parts of the mass, in elaborate and ever-changing polyphony. One of the high points of the mass is the et incarnatus est section of the Credo, where the texture becomes homophonic, and the tune appears in the topmost voice; here the portion which would normally set "Sing, O my tongue, of the mystery of the divine body" is instead given the words "And he became incarnate by the Holy Ghost from the Virgin Mary, and was made man." 
Parody masses, masses on popular songsIn parody masses, the source material was not a single line, but an entire texture, often of a popular song. Several works by Josquin fall loosely into this category, including the Missa Fortuna desperata, based on the three-voice song Fortuna desperata (possibly by Antoine Busnois); the Missa Malheur me bat (based on a chanson variously ascribed to Obrecht, Ockeghem, or, most likely, Abertijne Malcourt);  and the Missa Mater Patris, based on a three-voice motet by Antoine Brumel. The Missa Mater Patris is probably the first true parody mass to be composed, for it no longer contains any hint of a cantus firmus.  Parody technique was to become the most usual means of mass composition for the remainder of the 16th century, although the mass gradually fell out of favor as the motet grew in esteem.
Masses on solmization syllablesThe earliest known mass by any composer using this method of composition – the soggetto cavato – is the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae, which Josquin probably wrote in the early 1480s for the powerful Ercole I, Duke of Ferrara. The notes of the cantus firmus are drawn from the musical syllables of the Duke's own name: Re – Ut – Re – Ut – Re – Fa – Mi – Re.  Another mass using this technique is the Missa La sol fa re mi, based on the musical syllables contained in "Lascia fare mi" ("leave me alone!"). The story, as told by Glareanus in 1547, was that an unknown aristocrat used to order suitors away with this phrase, and Josquin immediately wrote an "exceedingly elegant" mass on it as a jab at him. 
Canonic masses
Canonic masses came into increasing prominence in the latter part of the 15th century. Early examples include Ockeghem's famous Missa prolationum, consisting entirely of mensuration canons, the Missa L'homme armé of Guillaume Faugues, whose cantus firmus is presented in canon at the descending fifth, and the Missa [Ad fugam] of Marbrianus de Orto, based on freely composed canons at the fifth between superius and tenor. Josquin makes use of canon in the Osanna and Agnus Dei III of the Missa L'homme armé sexti toni, throughout the Missa Sine nomine, and in the final three movements of the Missa De beata virgine. The Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales incorporates mensuration canons in the Kyrie, Benedictus, and Agnus Dei II. 
MotetsJosquin's motet style varied from almost strictly homophonic settings with block chords and syllabic text declamation to highly ornate contrapuntal fantasias, to the psalm settings which combined these extremes with the addition of rhetorical figures and text-painting that foreshadowed the later development of the madrigal. He wrote many of his motets for four voices, an ensemble size which had become the compositional norm around 1500, and he also was a considerable innovator in writing motets for five and six voices.  No motets of more than six voices have been reliably attributed to Josquin.
Almost all of Josquin's motets use some kind of compositional constraint on the process; they are not freely composed.  Some of them use a cantus firmus as a unifying device; some are canonic; some use a motto which repeats throughout; some use several of these methods. The motets that use canon can be roughly divided into two groups: those in which the canon is plainly designed to be heard and appreciated as such, and another group in which a canon is present, but almost impossible to hear, and seemingly written to be appreciated by the eye, and by connoisseurs. Josquin frequently used imitation, especially paired imitation, in writing his motets, with sections akin to fugal expositions occurring on successive lines of the text he was setting. An example is his setting of Dominus regnavit (Psalm 93), for four voices; each of the lines of the psalm begins with a voice singing a new tune alone, quickly followed by entries of other three voices in imitation. Reese, p. 249 In writing polyphonic settings of psalms, Josquin was a pioneer, and psalm settings form a large proportion of the motets of his later years. Few composers prior to Josquin had written polyphonic psalm settings.  Some of Josquin's settings include the famous Miserere, written in Ferrara in 1503 or 1504 and most likely inspired by the recent execution of the reformist monk Girolamo Savonarola,  Memor esto verbi tui, based on Psalm 119, and two settings of De profundis (Psalm 130), both of which are often considered to be among his most significant accomplishments.  
Chansons and instrumental compositions 
In the domain of secular music, Josquin left numerous French chansons, for from three to six voices, as well as a handful of Italian secular songs known as frottole, as well as some pieces which were probably intended for instrumental performance. Problems of attribution are even more acute with the chansons than they are with other portions of his output: while about 70 three and four-voice chansons were published under his name during his lifetime, only six of the more than thirty five- and six-voice chansons attributed to him were circulated under his name during the same time. Many of the attributions added after his death are considered to be unreliable, and much work has been done in the last decades of the 20th century to correct attributions on stylistic grounds. Josquin's earliest chansons were probably composed in northern Europe, under the influence of composers such as Ockeghem and Busnois. Unlike them, however, he never adhered strictly to the conventions of the formes fixes – the rigid and complex repetition patterns of the rondeau, virelai, and ballade – instead he often wrote his early chansons in strict imitation, a feature they shared with many of his sacred works.  He was one of the first composers of chansons to make all voices equal parts of the texture; and many of his chansons contain points of imitation, in the manner of motets. However he did use melodic repetition, especially where the lines of text rhymed, and many of his chansons had a lighter texture, as well a faster tempo, than his motets.Inside of his chansons, he often used a cantus firmus, sometimes a popular song whose origin can no longer be traced, as in Si j'avoye Marion.  Other times he used a tune originally associated with a separate text; and still other times he freely composed an entire song, using no apparent external source material. Another technique he sometimes used was to take a popular song and write it as a canon with itself, in two inner voices, and write new melodic material above and around it, to a new text: he used this technique in one of his most famous chansons, Faulte d'argent ("The problem with money"), a song sung by a man who wakes in bed with a prostitute, broke and unable to pay her.Some of his chansons were doubtless designed to be performed instrumentally. That Petrucci published many of them without text is strong evidence of this; additionally, some of the pieces (for example, the fanfare-like Vive le roy) contain writing more idiomatic for instruments than voices. Josquin's most famous chansons circulated widely in Europe. Some of the better known include his lament on the death of Ockeghem, Nymphes des bois/Requiem aeternam; Mille regretz (the attribution of which has recently been questioned);  Plus nulz regretz; and Je me complains.In addition to his French chansons, he wrote at least three pieces in the manner of the Italian frottola, a popular Italian song form which he would have encountered during his years in Milan. These songs include Scaramella, El grillo, and In te domine speravi. They are even simpler in texture than his French chansons, being almost uniformly syllabic and homophonic, and they remain among the most frequently sung portions of his output.
Motet-chansonsWhile in Milan, Josquin wrote several examples of a new type of piece developed by the composers there, the motet-chanson. These compositions were texturally very similar to 15th century chansons in the formes fixes mold, except that unlike those completely secular works, they contained a chant-derived Latin cantus-firmus in the lowest of the three voices. The other voices, in French, sang a secular text which had either a symbolic relationship to the sacred Latin text, or commented on it.  Josquin's three known motet-chansons, Que vous madame/In pace, A la mort/Monstra te esse matrem, and Fortune destrange plummaige/Pauper sum ego, are similar stylistically to those by the other composers of the Milan chapel, such as Loyset Compère and Alexander Agricola.
InfluenceJosquin's fame lasted throughout the 16th century, and indeed increased for several decades after his death. Zarlino, writing in the 1580s, was still using examples from Josquin in his treatises on composition; and Josquin's fame was only eclipsed after the beginning of the Baroque era, with the decline of the pre-tonal polyphonic style. During the 18th and 19th centuries Josquin's fame was overshadowed by later Roman School composer Palestrina, whose music was seen as the summit of polyphonic refinement, and codified into a system of composition by theorists such as Johann Fux; however, during the 20th century, Josquin's reputation has grown steadily, to the point where scholars again consider him "the greatest and most successful composer of the age."   According to Richard Sherr, writing in the introduction to the Josquin Companion, addressing specifically the shrinking of Josquin's canon due to correction of misattributions, "Josquin will survive because his best music really is as magnificent as everybody has always said it was." Since the 1950s Josquin's reputation has been boosted by the increasing availability of recordings, of which there are many, and the rise of ensembles specializing in the performance of 16th century vocal music, many of which consider Josquin's output to be at the heart of their repertoire. 
Media 
Works listThe difficulties in compiling a works list for Josquin cannot be overstated. Because of his immense prestige in the early sixteenth century, many scribes and publishers did not resist the temptation of attributing anonymous or otherwise spurious works to Josquin. The German editor Georg Forster summed up the situation admirably in 1540 when he wrote, "Now that Josquin is dead, he is putting out more works than when he was alive."  Thus, the authenticity of many of the works listed below is disputed.
Masses

Missa Ave maris stella (Rome, 1486–1495) (4 voices)
Missa D'ung aultre amer (4 voices; authorship questioned by Jeremy Noble)
Missa de Beata Virgine (around 1510) (4 voices in parts I–II, 5 voices in parts III–V)
Missa Di dadi (=N'aray je jamais) (4 voices; authorship doubted by some scholars)
Missa Faisant regretz (4 voices)
Missa Fortuna desperata (4 voices)
Missa Gaudeamus (4 voices)
Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae (Ferrara, 1503/04) (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa La sol fa re mi (4 voices)
Missa L'ami Baudichon (4 voices)
Missa L'homme armé sexti toni (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa L'homme armé super voces musicales (4 voices)
Missa Malheur me bat (4 voices, 6 in Agnus III)
Missa Mater patris (4 voices; authorship doubted by some scholars)
Missa Pange lingua (Condé, around 1514) (4 voices)
Missa Sine nomine (4 voices; canonic mass, originally titled "Missa Ad fugam")

Doubtful works:

Missa Ad fugam (4 voices)
Missa da pacem (4 voices)
Missa Une musque de Biscaye (4 voices)


Mass fragmentsOf questionable authenticity, with the exception of the Credo De tous biens playne:

Credo Chascun me crie (= Des rouges nez)
Credo De tous biens playne
Credo Vilayge (II)
Credo [Quarti toni] (canonic)
Gloria De beata virgine
Sanctus De passione
Sanctus D'ung aultre amer
Credo Vilayge (I)
Credo La belle se siet (probably Robert de Févin)


Motets

Absalon, fili mi (4vv) (attribution has been challenged; possibly Pierre de La Rue)
Absolve, quaesumus, Domine/Requiem aeternam (6vv) (attribution has been challenged)
Alma redemptoris mater;
Alma redemptoris mater / Ave regina caelorum;
Ave Maria, gratia plena ... benedicta tu (4vv);
Ave Maria, gratia plena ... Virgo serena (Milan 1484/85); 
Ave munda spes, Maria (not in first complete works edition)
Ave nobilissima creatura
Ave verum corpus natum
Benedicta es, caelorum regina
Christum ducem, qui per crucem (4vv)
De profundis clamavi (4vv) (possibly middle-period composition: attribution has been questioned)
De profundis clamavi (5vv) (late composition)
Domine exaudi orationem meam
Domine, ne in fuore tuo (4vv)
Domine, non secundum peccata nostra (2-4vv; for Rome)
Ecce, tu pulchra es, amica mea
Factum est autem
Gaude virgo, mater Christi
Homo quidam fecit cenam magnam
Honor, decus, imperium
Huc me sydereo descendere jussit Olympo (5vv)
Illibata Dei virgo nutrix
In exitu Israel de Aegypto
In illo tempore assumpsit Jesus doudecim disciplus
Iniquos odio habui (4vv, only tenor part survives)
In principio erat Verbum (authenticity has been questioned) 
Inviolata, integra et casta es, Maria
Jubilate Deo omnis terra
Liber generationis Jesu Christi
Magnificat quarti toni (attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds)
Magnificat terii toni (attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds)
Memor esto verbi tui
Miserere mei Deus (Ferrara, 1503)
Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo (France, 1480/83)
Missus est Gabriel angelus ad Mariam Virginem
Mittit ad virginem
Monstra te esse matrem
O admirabile commercium (part of a 5-motet cycle)
O bone et dulcissime Jesu
O Domine Jesu Christe (part of a Passion setting in 5 sections)
O virgo prudentissima
O virgo virginum
Pater noster, qui es in caelis (Condé, 1505–1521)
Planxit autem David
Praeter rerum seriem
Qui edunt me adhuc
Qui habitat in adiutorio altissimi
Qui velatus facie fuisti (part of a Passion setting in 6 sections)
Salve regina (4vv)
Salve regina (5vv, 1502)
Stabat Mater
Tu lumen, tu splendor
Tu solus qui facis mirabilia
Usquequo Domine oblivisceris me (attrib on stylistic grounds; only part survives)
Ut Phoebi radiis
Veni, sancte spiritus (also attrib to Forestier)
Victimae paschali laudes
Virgo prudentissima
Virgo salutiferi (Ferrara, 1504/05)
Vultum tuum deprecabuntur (7-part Passion cycle) (1480s)


Motet-chansons

A la mort / Monstra te esse matrem
Fortune destrange plummaige/Pauper sum ego
Que vous madame / In pace in idipsum


Chansons

A l'heure que je vous
A l'ombre d'ung buissonet, au matinet (3vv)
Adieu mes amours
Adieu mes amours (6vv or 7vv)
Baisé moy, ma doulce amye (4vv)
Belle, pour l'amour de vous
Bergerette savoyenne
Cela sans plus
Comment peult haver joye
Cueur langoreulx
De tous biens plaine (3vv)
De tous biens plaine (4vv)
Douleur me bat
Du mien amant
Dulces exuviae
En l'ombre d'ung buissonet tout, au long (3vv)
En l'ombre d'ung buissonet tout, au long (4vv)
Entré je suis en grant pensée (3vv)
Entré je suis en grant pensée (4vv)
Fama malum
Faulte d'argent
Fors seulement (only one of six voice parts survives)
Fortuna d'un gran tempo
Helas madame
Ile fantazies de Joskin
Incessament livré suis à martire
Je me complains
Je n'ose plus
Je ris et si ay larme
Je sey bien dire
La belle se siet
La Bernardina
La plus de plus
Le villain [jaloux]
Ma bouche rit et mon cueur pleure
Mille Regretz (4 voices)
Mon mary m'a diffamée
N'esse pas ung grant desplaisir
Nymphes des bois (written for the death of Johannes Ockeghem)
Nymphes, nappés / Circumdederunt me
Parfons regretz
Petite camusette;
Plaine de dueil
Plus n'estes ma maistresse
Plus nulz regretz (written between 1508 and 1511, commemorating the 1507 Treaty of Calais);
Plusieurs regretz
Pour souhaitter
Quant je vous voye
Qui belles amours a
Recordans de my signora
Regretz sans fin;
Se congié prens
Si j'ay perdu mon amy (3vv)
Si j'ay perdu mon amy (4vv)
Tant vous aimme Bergeronette
Tenz moy en voz bras
Une mousque de Biscaye;
Vive le roy (instrumental piece, written for Louis XII)
Vous l'arez, s'il vous plaist
Vous ne l'arez pas
textless (4vv)


Frottole

El Grillo
In te Domine speravi per trovar pietà
Scaramella va alla guerra


References and further reading

Atlas, Allan W., ed. Renaissance Music: Music in Western Europe, 1400–1600. New York: Norton, 1998. ISBN 0-393-97169-4.
Blackburn, Bonnie J. "Masses Based on Popular Songs and Solmization Syllables". The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 51–88. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5
Brown, Howard M. "Chanson" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Charles, Sydney R. Josquin des Prez: A Guide to Research. New York and London: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1983.
Clutterham, Leslie. "Dating Josquin's Enigmatic Motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix". Choral Journal 38, no. 3 (October 1997): 9–14. Online version as "Auobiographical  [ sic   Constructions in Josquin's Motet Illibata Dei virgo nutrix: Evidence for a Later Dating]" (Accessed 8 May 2012).
Duffin, Ross W., ed. A Josquin Anthology. Oxford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-19-353218-2.
Elders, Willem, ed. New Josquin Edition, 30 vols. Utrecht: Koninklijke Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis, 1987- . ISBN 978-90-6375-051-0.
Elders, Willem, and and Frits de Haen, eds. Proceedings of the International Josquin Symposium, Utrecht 1986 . Utrecht: Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis, 1986. ISBN 90-6375-148-6.
Fallows, David. Josquin. Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2009, ISBN 978-2-503-53065-9.
Gleason, Harold, and Warren Becker. Music in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Bloomington, Indiana: Frangipani Press, 1981. ISBN 0-89917-034-X.
Godt, Irving. "Motivic Integration in Josquin's Motets." Journal of Music Theory, 21, 2 (Autumn, 1977): 264–92.
Higgins, Paula. "The Apotheosis of Josquin des Prez and Other Mythologies of Musical Genius". Journal of the American Musicological Society, 57, 3 (Autumn, 2004): 443–510.
Lowinsky, Edward E., ed. Josquin des Prez. London: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Macey, Patrick. Bonfire Songs: Savonarola's Musical Legacy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1998. ISBN 0-19-816669-9.
   
Matthews, Lora, and Paul Merkley. "Josquin des Prez". The Journal of Musicology (Summer 1998).  
Merkley, Paul. "Josquin Desprez in Ferrara". The Journal of Musicology 18, 4 (2001): 544–83.
Milsom, John. "Motets for Five or More Voices". In The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 281–320. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5
Noble, Jeremy. "Josquin Desprez (works)" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Pietschmann, Klaus. "Ein Graffito von Josquin Desprez auf der Cantoria der Sixtinischen Kapelle" Die Musikforschung vol. 52 no. 2 (1999), pp. 204–207.
Reese, Gustave. Music in the Renaissance. New York: W. W. Norton, 1954. ISBN 0-393-09530-4.
Reese, Gustave. "Josquin Desprez (biography)" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. London, Macmillan, 1980. (20 vol.) ISBN 1-56159-174-2.
Reese, Gustave, Jeremy Noble, Lewis Lockwood, Jessie Ann Owens, James Haar, Joseph Kerman, and Robert Stevenson. The new Grove High Renaissance Masters: Josquin, Plaestrina, Lassus, Byrd, Victoria. The Composer Biography Series; The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London: Macmillan Publishers, 1980–84. ISBN 0-393-30093-5.
Sherr, Richard, ed. The Josquin Companion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5.
Wegman, Rob C. "Who Was Josquin?" In The Josquin Companion, edited by Richard Sherr, 21–50. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-816335-5


Notes 
Recordings

1993 – Renaissance-polyfonie in Brugge. The Songbook of Zeghere van Male.. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1155. Contains a recording of O intemerata and Mille regretz.
1996 – Pierre de la Rue . Missa Alleluia. Music at the Burgundy Court. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1232. Contains a recording of Gaude Virgo and Huc me sidereo by Josquin des Prez
1996 – Oh Flanders Free. Music of the Flemish Renaissance: Ockeghem, Josquin, Susato, De la Rue. Capilla Flamenca. Alamire LUB 03, Naxos 8.554516. Contains a recording of El grillo, Guillaume se va chaufer and Kyrie from Missa la sol fa re mi by Josquin des Prez
1998 – Margarete – Maximilian I. Musik um 1500. Capilla Flamenca with La Caccia, Schola Cantorum Cantate Domino Aalst, Schola Gregoriana Lovaniensis. ORF Shop CD 265 (2 CDs). Contains a recording of Adieu mes amours by Josquin des Prez.
2000 – Magic. Flanders Recorder Quartet and friends. Contains a recording of Mille Regretz and Scaramella by Josquin des Prez.
2002 – Pierre de la Rue: Missa de septem doloribus. Capilla Flamenca and Psallentes. MEW 0207. Contains a recording of Stabat mater by Josquin des Prez.
2005 – Dulcis Melancholia. Biographie musicale de Marguerite d’Autriche. Capilla Flamenca. MEW 0525. Contains a recording of Belle pour l'amour de vous, Plus nulz regretz and Que vous madame / In pace by Josquin Desprez.
2007 – Désir D'aymer. Love Lyrics Around 1500: From Flanders To Italy. Capilla Flamenca. Eufoda 1369. Contains a recording of Baisés moy (4 voices and 6 voices) and O venus bant by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Salve Mater Salve Jesu. Chant and Polyphony From Bohemia Around 1500. Capilla Flamenca and Schola Gregoriana Pragensis, with Barbara Maria Willi. KTC 1346. Contains a recording of Qui velatus facie fuisti by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Music for the Soul Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 001. Contains a recording of the Agnus Dei from the Missa da pace and the Agnues Dei from the Missa L'homme armee by Josquin des Prez.
2007 – Mediaeval Magic Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 002. Contains a recording of Praeter rerum seriem by Josquin des Prez.
2009 – Lay a garland Lumina Vocal Ensemble conducted by Anna Pope - LVE 003. Contains a recording of Absalon, fili mi attributed to Josquin des Prez.


External links

 
 
Free access to high-resolution images of manuscripts containing works by Josquin from Digital Image Archive of Medieval Music
 
 
 
Josquin biography and discography
Listen to free recordings of compositions from Umeå Akademiska Kör.
Motet Ave Maria as interactive hypermedia (Shockwave required) at the BinAural Collaborative Hypertext

   
 
DEFAULTSORT



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Larry Bird
 
 
 
Larry Joe Bird (born December 7, 1956) is an American former NBA basketball player, coach, and team president. Drafted into the NBA sixth overall by the Boston Celtics in 1978, Bird started at small forward and power forward for thirteen seasons, spearheading one of the NBA's most formidable frontcourts that included center Robert Parish and forward Kevin McHale. Bird was a 12-time NBA All-Star and was named  the league's Most Valuable Player (MVP) three times. He played his entire professional career for Boston, winning three NBA championships.Due to chronic back problems, he retired as a player in 1992.  He was a member of the Dream Team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics. Bird was voted to the NBA's 50th Anniversary All-Time Team Larry Bird summary NBA.com.  in 1996 and inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame  in 1998. He served as head coach of the Indiana Pacers from 1997 to 2000. In 2003, he assumed the role of president of basketball operations for the Pacers, and he held that position until 2012.  In addition to being part of the 50–40–90 Club, he is the only person in NBA history to be named Most Valuable Player, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year.   
Early lifeLarry Bird was born in West Baden, Indiana, the son of Georgia (née Kerns) and Claude Joseph "Joe" Bird.    He grew up in both West Baden and the adjacent town French Lick, which earned him the nickname "the Hick from French Lick" in his professional basketball career.    Bird recalled how his mother would make do on the family's meager earnings: "If there was a payment to the bank due, and we needed shoes, she'd get the shoes, and then deal with them guys at the bank. I don't mean she wouldn't pay the bank, but the children always came first."    According to Bird, his being poor as a child "motivates me to this day".  He sometimes was sent to live with his grandmother due to the family's struggles. The Bird family's struggle with poverty was compounded by the alcoholism and personal difficulties of Joe Bird, who likely suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder from serving in the Korean War.  Joe Bird committed suicide on February 3, 1975, when Larry was 18 years old. Bird started for French Lick/West Baden's high school team, Springs Valley High School, where he left as the school's all-time scoring leader.    Bird's high school coach, Jim Jones, was a key factor to Bird's success. "Jonesie", as Bird called him, would come help Bird and his friends practice any day of the week.  Bird would often go to the gym early, shoot between classes, and stay late into the evening.
Collegiate careerBird received a scholarship to play college basketball for Bob Knight and the Indiana University Hoosiers in 1974.  However, he was overwhelmed by the size of the campus and number of students and was not mentally ready for this stage of life; according to Bird, "it didn't take long to realize that I was out of my cocoon."  Bird was also treated poorly by an established IU star, Kent Benson; as Bird recalled, the other upperclassmen of the team treated him well.  He dropped out of Indiana after 24 days, disappointing his mother. Magic & Bird: A Courtship of Rivals. HBO, 2010.  Bird returned home to French Lick where he enrolled in the nearby Northwood Institute before dropping out and getting a job with the Street Department (the department picked up garbage, repaired roads, removed snow, mowed lawns, etc.) for a year.  He played AAU basketball for Hancock Construction  and, after that year, decided to enroll at Indiana State University in Terre Haute, where he was coached by Bob King.King suffered a stroke prior to the 1978–79 season and assistant Bill Hodges, who had persuaded Bird to return to college basketball,  was promoted to head coach. Before Bird, the Sycamores had never been to the Division I NCAA tournament;  he led the team to the NCAA championship game in 1979, his senior season, only to lose to the Michigan State University Spartans, who were led by his future NBA rival, Earvin "Magic" Johnson. The Sycamores finished the season 33–1. That year, Bird won the USBWA College Player of the Year, Naismith and Wooden Awards, given to the year's top male college basketball player. After his three seasons at Indiana State, he left as the fifth-highest scorer in NCAA history. Bird finished his collegiate career with an average of 30.3 points per game. In 2007, he was voted as one of the Missouri Valley Conference men's basketball 50 greatest players. 
NCAA career statistics
  
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1976–77
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 28 || ... || 36.9 || .544 || ... || .840 || 13.3 || 4.4 || ... || ... || 32.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1977–78
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 32 || ... || ... || .524 || ... || .793 || 11.5 || 3.9 || ... || ... || 30.0
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1978–79
| style="text-align:left;"| Indiana State
| 34 || ... || ... || .532 || ... || .831 || 14.9 || 5.5 || ... || ... || 28.6
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 
| style="text-align:left;"| Career Larry Bird, basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 20, 2010. 
| 94 || ... || ... || .533 || ... || .822 || 13.3 || 4.6 || ... || ... || 30.3
|-
 
1979–1981: Immediate impactThe Boston Celtics selected the 6'9", 220-pound Bird 6th overall in the 1978 NBA Draft,   even though they were uncertain whether he would enter the NBA or remain at Indiana State to play his senior season. Bird ultimately decided to play his final college season, but the Celtics retained their exclusive right to sign him until the 1979 NBA Draft, because of the NBA's "junior eligible" rule (allowing a collegiate player to be drafted when the player's original "entering" class was graduating and giving them one calendar year to sign them, even if they went back to college).  Shortly before that deadline, and after bitter contract negotiations, Bird agreed to sign with the Celtics, inking a 5 year $3.25 million contract which made him, at the time, the highest-paid rookie in the history of the NBA.   Shortly afterwards, the NBA draft eligibility rules were changed to prevent teams from drafting players before they were ready to sign.  The rule is called the Bird Collegiate Rule.Bird's impact on the Celtics was immediate. The Celtics were 29–53 during the 1978–79 season, but with Bird the team improved to 61–21 in the 1979–80 season, posting the league's best regular season record. Bird's collegiate rival, Magic Johnson, also had entered the NBA in 1979, joining the Los Angeles Lakers. In 1980, despite a strong rookie season from Johnson, Bird was named the league's Rookie of the Year and was voted onto the Eastern Conference All-Star team (an honor he would receive for each of his 12 full seasons in the NBA). For the 1980 season, Bird led the Celtics in scoring (21.3 points/game), rebounding (10.4 rebounds/game), steals (143), and minutes played (2,955) and was second in assists (4.5 assists/game) and three-pointers (58). Though Boston was beaten by the more athletic Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern Conference finals that year, Bird's addition to the team had renewed the promise of Celtic glory.Following Bird's first season, the Celtics acquired center Robert Parish and the 3rd pick in the 1980 NBA Draft via a trade with the Golden State Warriors (in exchange for the 1st and 13th picks in the draft). After the Warriors took Joe Barry Carroll with the 1st pick and the Utah Jazz chose Darrell Griffith second, the Celtics selected University of Minnesota power forward Kevin McHale. With Bird at small forward, the additions of Parish and McHale gave Boston one of the most formidable frontcourts in the history of the NBA. The three would anchor the Celtics throughout Bird's career.In his second season, Bird led the Celtics into the playoffs, where they faced off for a second consecutive year with Julius Erving's Philadelphia 76ers. Bird helped the Celtics overcome a 3–1 deficit by winning the last three games by two, two, and one point margins, propelling them into the NBA Finals, where they defeated the Houston Rockets in six games with Bird averaging 15.3 points on .419 shooting, 15.3 rebounds and 7.0 assists per game.  It would be the first of three championships in Bird's career, as well as the first of his five Finals appearances.
1982–1987: MVPs, championships and the rivalry with Magic Johnson 
The additions of Bird and Johnson rejuvenated the NBA, which had suffered from low attendance and minimal television interest through much of the 1970s. Immediately upon their entry into the league, the two players became repeating presences in the NBA Finals. Johnson's Lakers won the championship in 1980, Bird's Celtics captured the NBA title in 1981, and Johnson's Lakers wrested it back in 1982. Bird and Johnson first dueled in the 1979 NCAA title game; as professional basketball players, they would face off numerous times during the 1980s, including the NBA Finals of 1984, 1985 and 1987. Lakers versus Celtics, and specifically Bird versus Magic, quickly became one of the greatest rivalries in the history of basketball.In 1984, the Celtics defeated the Lakers in a seven-game Finals, winning game seven 111–102.  Bird averaged 27.4 points on .484 shooting and 14 rebounds a game during the series,  earning the award of Finals Most Valuable Player (MVP). Bird was also named the league regular season MVP for that year.  In 1985, however, the Lakers avenged the loss, defeating the Celtics in game 6 of the Finals in the Boston Garden. In a losing effort against Los Angeles, Bird averaged 23.8 points on .449 shooting, 8.8 rebounds and 5.0 assists per game.  That year, the NBA again named Bird the league MVP. On  , in a game played between the Celtics and Atlanta Hawks at the University of New Orleans Lakefront Arena in New Orleans, Louisiana, Bird scored a career high 60 points in a tremendous shooting display.  Bird scored all 19 of his points in the third quarter without the aid of a free throw; instead, he scored on jump shots from 20 feet and out.  Bird scored Boston's last sixteen points in the game.  In the fourth quarter, he made a fadeaway three-point shot while being fouled.  He was not given continuation and the basket was not allowed (instead it was ruled a non-shooting foul and he received two free throws).  Bird's 59th and 60th points were scored on a 17-foot jump shot at the buzzer.  For the game, Bird officially shot 22 of 36 from the field, 1 of 4 from three-point range, and 15 of 16 from the free throw line.Boston would have another great season the next year, with help from another Hall of Famer, Bill Walton. Walton, whose up and down career had been plagued by foot injuries, was looking for a team, and after having been turned down by the Lakers called Celtics president and general manager Red Auerbach in a last-ditch effort to close out his career on an upswing. Because of Walton's reputation for being injury prone, Auerbach was initially unwilling to take a risk on him, but Bird, who happened to be in Auerbach's office at the time of Walton's call, urged him to sign Walton, saying that if Walton felt he was healthy enough to play, it was all Bird needed to hear.With Walton backing up Kevin McHale and Robert Parish, the Celtics would return to the finals in 1986, albeit not against Johnson and the Lakers, who lost in the Western Conference Finals to the Houston Rockets. The 1986 Celtic team, which finished the regular season 67–15 and defeated the Rockets in six games, is generally considered to be the best of Bird's career. Bird again was named the Finals' MVP for that year, averaging 24 points on .482 shooting, 9.7 rebounds and 9.5 assists per game for the series.  He also won his third consecutive league MVP award,  a feat matched only by the great Celtic center Bill Russell and the dominant Wilt Chamberlain, who played for Philadelphia and Los Angeles.In 1987, the Celtics made their last Finals appearance of Bird's career, fighting through difficult series against the Milwaukee Bucks and Detroit Pistons but as they reached the NBA Finals, the Celtics, hampered by devastating injuries, lost to a dominant Lakers team which had won 65 games during the season. The Celtics ended up losing to the Lakers in six games, with Bird averaging 24.2 points on .445 shooting, 10 rebounds and 5.5 assists per game in the championship series.  The Celtics would fall short in 1988 losing to the Pistons in 6 games in the Eastern Conference Finals as the Pistons made up from the heartbreak the previous season. Between them, Bird and Johnson captured eight NBA championships during the 1980s, with Magic getting five and Bird three. During the 1980s, either Boston or Los Angeles appeared in every NBA Finals.  Throughout the 1980s, contests between the Celtics and the Lakers—both during the regular season and in the Finals—attracted enormous television audiences. The first regular season game between the Celtics and the Lakers in the 1987–88 season proved to be a classic with Magic Johnson banking in an off balance shot from near the three-point line at the buzzer for a 115–114 Lakers win at Boston Garden.  The historical rift between the teams, which faced each other several times in championship series of the 1960s, fueled fan interest in the rivalry. Not since Bill Russell squared off against Wilt Chamberlain had professional basketball enjoyed such a marquee matchup. The apparent contrast between the two players and their respective teams seemed scripted for television: Bird, the introverted small-town hero with the blue-collar work ethic, fit perfectly with the throwback, hard-nosed style of the Celtics, while the stylish, gregarious Johnson ran the Lakers' fast-paced "Showtime" offense amidst the bright lights and celebrities of Los Angeles. A 1980s Converse commercial for its "Weapon" line of basketball shoes (endorsed by both Bird and Johnson) reflected the perceived dichotomy between the two players. In the commercial, Bird is practicing alone on a rural basketball court when Johnson pulls up in a sleek limousine and challenges him to a one-on-one match.Despite the intensity of their rivalry, Bird and Johnson became friends off the court. Their friendship blossomed when the two players worked together to film the Converse commercial, which depicted them as archenemies. Johnson appeared at Bird's retirement ceremony on February 4, 1993 and emotionally described Bird as a "friend forever".
1988–1992: Waning years 
In 1988, Bird had the best statistical season of his career, but the Celtics failed to reach the NBA Finals for the first time in five years, losing to the Pistons in six games during the Eastern Conference Finals. Bird started the 1988–89 season, but ended his season after six games to have bone spurs surgically removed from both of his heels. He returned to the Celtics in 1989, but debilitating back problems and an aging Celtic roster prevented him from regaining his mid-1980s form. Nonetheless, through the final years of his career, Bird maintained his status as one of the premier players in the game. He averaged over 20 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists a game in his last three seasons with the Celtics, and shot better than 45% from the field in each. Bird led the Celtics to playoff appearances in each of those three seasons.Bird's body, however, continued to break down. He had been bothered by back problems for years, and his back became progressively worse. After leading the Celtics to a 29–5 start to the 1990–91 season, he missed 22 games due to a compressed nerve root in his back, a condition that would eventually lead to his retirement. He had off-season surgery to remove a disc from his back, but his back problems continued and he missed 37 games during the 1991–92 season.  His past glory would be briefly rekindled, however, in a game that season in which he scored 49 points in a double-overtime victory over the Portland Trail Blazers. During the 1992 Eastern Conference semi-finals against the Cleveland Cavaliers, Bird missed four of the seven games in the series due to those recurring back problems.
In the summer of 1992, Bird joined Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan and other NBA stars to play for the United States basketball team in that year's Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. It was the first time in America's Olympic history that the country sent professional basketball players to compete. The "Dream Team" won the men's basketball gold medal.Following his Olympic experience, on August 18, 1992, Bird announced his retirement as an NBA player. He finished his career with averages of more than 24 points, 10 rebounds and 6 assists per game, while shooting 49.6% from the field, 88.6% from the free throw line and 37.6% from three-point range. Following Bird's departure, the Celtics promptly retired his jersey number 33.In 1989, Bird published his autobiography, Drive: The Story of My Life with Bob Ryan. The book chronicles his life and career up to the 1989 NBA season.
NBA career after retirement 


The Celtics employed Bird as a special assistant in the team's front office from 1992 until 1997. In 1997, Bird accepted the position of coach of the Indiana Pacers and said he would be on the job for no more than three years. Despite having no previous coaching experience, Bird led the Pacers to a 58–24 record—the franchise's best as an NBA team at the time—in the 1997–98 season, and pushed the Bulls to seven games in the Eastern Conference finals.  He was named the NBA Coach of the Year for his efforts, becoming the only person in NBA history to have won both the MVP and Coach of the Year awards.  He then led the Pacers to two consecutive Central Division titles in 1999 and 2000, and a berth in the NBA finals in 2000.Bird resigned as Pacers coach shortly after the end of the 2000 season, following through on his initial promise to coach for only three years. In 2003, he returned as the Pacers' President of Basketball Operations, overseeing team personnel and coaching moves, as well as the team's draft selections.  Bird promoted David Morway to general manager in 2008, but Bird still had the final say in basketball matters. After the 2011–2012 NBA season, Bird was named NBA Executive of the Year.On June 27, 2012, a day before the 2012 NBA Draft, Bird and the Pacers announced that they would be parting ways later that summer. Bird said health issues were among the reasons for his leaving.  Donnie Walsh has been named to replace him. 
Head coaching record  
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|82||58||24||.707|| style="text-align:center;"|2nd in Central||16||10||6||.625
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in Conf. Finals
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|50||33||17||.660|| style="text-align:center;"|1st in Central||13||9||4||.692
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in Conf. Finals
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|IND
| style="text-align:left;"| 
|82||56||26||.683|| style="text-align:center;"|1st in Central||23||13||10||.565
| style="text-align:center;"|Lost in NBA Finals
|- class="sortbottom"
| style="text-align:left;"|Career
| ||214||147||67||.687|| ||52||32||20||.615
 
Legacy In 1999, Bird ranked No. 30 in ESPN's SportsCentury's 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th century.For the 2008 NBA Finals, which featured a rematch of the Celtics-Lakers rivalry, Bird appeared in a split-screen advertisement with Magic Johnson (as part of the "There Can Only Be One" campaign which had played throughout the 2008 NBA Playoffs but to that point only featured players from the two teams competing in a given series) discussing the meaning of rivalries.Bird was widely considered one of Red Auerbach's favorite players. He considered Bird to be the greatest basketball player of all time.  Auerbach was so enamored with the player that he drafted him out of Indiana State and waited a year before Bird was eligible to suit up for the Celtics.  During his introductory press conference, after Auerbach's contentious negotiations with agent Bob Woolf, Bird announced he "would have played for free."  This was after Woolf asked for the most lucrative contract in NBA history, to which Auerbach was quick to point out that Bird had not played a game in the NBA yet. Bird is the only person to be named an MVP, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year in the NBA. 
Player profileBird, a versatile wing man who played the power forward and small forward positions, is considered one of the greatest players of all time, to which his twelve All-Star team nominations are a testament. The sharpshooting Bird made his name stepping up his performance in critical situations, and is credited with a long list of dominating games, buzzer beaters and clutch defensive plays. He won two NBA Finals MVP and three regular-season MVP awards. He won them all in a row, a feat only shared by Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain.Bird possessed an uncanny and unparalleled ability to anticipate and react to the strategies of his opponents. His talent for recognizing the moves of opponents and teammates prompted his first coach with the Celtics, Bill Fitch, to nickname him "Kodak", because he seemed to formulate mental pictures of every play that took place on the court.Bird scored 24.3 points per game in his career on a high .496 field goal average, a stellar .886 free throw average (9th best all-time) and a 37.6 percentage on three-point shots. Bird was also a good rebounder (10.0 rebound career average) and an excellent playmaker (6.3 assist career average). His multidimensional game made him a consistent triple-double threat; Bird currently ranks fifth all-time in triple-doubles with 59, not including the 10 he recorded in the playoffs. Bird's lifetime player efficiency rating (PER) is 23.5, 18th all-time, a further testament to his all around game.  Additionally, he is the only 20, 10, 5 player in NBA history (points, rebounds, assists per game) with a lifetime PRA rating (points + rebounds + assists per game) of 40.6, which is 8th all-time.  Bird was the first player in NBA history to shoot 50% or better on field goals, 40% on three-pointers, and 90% on free-throws in a single NBA season while achieving the league minimum for makes in each category. Bird accomplished this feat twice and is second only to Steve Nash for seasons in the 50–40–90 Club.Bird is also remembered as an excellent defender. While he was neither fast nor quick-footed, and could not always shut down an individual player one-on-one, he consistently displayed a knack for anticipating the moves of his opponent, allowing him to intercept passes and create turnovers. His 1,556 career steals ranks 27th all-time.  Unspectacular but effective defensive moves, such as jumping into a passing lane to make a steal or allowing his man to step past and drive to the hoop, then blocking the opponent's shot from behind, were staples of Bird's defensive game. In recognition of his defensive abilities, Bird was named to three All-Defensive Second Teams.Bird's humble roots were the source of his most frequently used moniker, "The Hick From French Lick". Other observers called him "The Great White Hope".  He has also acquired the nickname "Larry Legend". Bird's competitive nature often emerged in nearly constant trash-talking on the court. Some notable examples follow:

During the three-point shooting contest on All-Star Weekend 1986, Bird entered the locker room, looked around without saying a word, then finally said, "I want all of you to know I am winning this thing.  I'm just looking around to see who's gonna finish up second." He won the shooting contest.
During one game on Christmas Day against the Indiana Pacers, before the game Bird told Chuck Person that he had a Christmas present waiting for him. During the game, when Person was on the bench, Bird shot a three-pointer on the baseline right in front of Person. Immediately after releasing the ball, Bird said to Person, "Merry f*%#ing Christmas!", and then the shot went in.  This was no doubt inspired by Person (nicknamed the "Rifleman") stating prior to the game that "The Rifleman is Coming, and He's Going Bird Hunting."
Reggie Miller recalled his encounter with Larry Bird's legendary trash talking ability in his book I Love Being the Enemy. Reggie tried to disrupt Larry's concentration when he was shooting free throws late in a game. Larry glared at him, made the first free throw and said, "You got to be kidding me. Rook, I'm the best shooter in the league right now. In the league. Understand? And you're up here trying to say something?"    Then Larry buried the second free throw.
Late in a tied game against the Seattle SuperSonics, Bird told Supersonics forward Xavier McDaniel, who was guarding him, “I’m going to get [the ball] right here and I am going to bury it in your face.”  As McDaniel remembers it, he responded by saying, “I know, I’ll be waiting.”  After a timeout, Bird made two baseline cuts, then posted in the exact spot he had indicated to McDaniel, paused, turned, and made it in his face.  He finished up the sequence by telling McDaniel, “I didn’t mean to leave two seconds on the clock.”  
On November 9, 1984, Bird was ejected along with Julius Erving in the third quarter after an on court scuffle. At the point of both ejections, Bird had outscored Erving 42 to 6. During the game, Bird had continuously informed Erving of their tallies with every chance he got to score. Bird denies this stating that it was teammate "M.L. (Carr) talking trash from the bench" during that game.  Eventually a shoving match ensued, then swings taken by both players, and finally a bench-clearing brawl.


NBA career statistics  

† NBA championship 
 Led the league   
 
Regular season 
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 82 || 36.0 || .474 || .406 || .836 || 10.4 || 4.5 || 1.7 || 0.6 || 21.3
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 82 || 39.5 || .478 || .270 || .863 || 10.9 || 5.5 || 2.0 || 0.8 || 21.2
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 77 || 58 || 38.0 || .503 || .212 || .863 || 10.9 || 5.8 || 1.9 || 0.9 || 22.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 79 || 79 || 37.7 || .504 || .286 || .840 || 11.0 || 5.8 || 1.9 || 0.9 || 23.6
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 79 || 77 || 38.3 || .492 || .247 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .888 || 10.1 || 6.6 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 24.2
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 80 || 77 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 39.5 || .522 || .427 || .882 || 10.5 || 6.6 || 1.6 || 1.2 || 28.7
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"|  †
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 82 || 81 || 38.0 || .496 || .423 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .896 || 9.8 || 6.8 || 2.0 || 0.6 || 25.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 74 || 73 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 40.6 || .525 || .400 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .910 || 9.2 || 7.6 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 28.1
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 76 || 75 || 39.0 || .527 || .414 || .916 || 9.3 || 6.1 || 1.6 || 0.8 || 29.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 6 || 6 || 31.5 || .471 || ... || .947 || 6.2 || 4.8 || 1.0 || 0.8 || 19.3
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 75 || 75 || 39.3 || .473 || .333 || style="background:#cfecec;"| .930 || 9.5 || 7.5 || 1.4 || 0.8 || 24.3
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 60 || 60 || 38.0 || .454 || .389 || .891 || 8.5 || 7.2 || 1.8 || 1.0 || 19.4
|-
| style="text-align:left;"|  
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 45 || 45 || 36.9 || .466 || .406 || .926 || 9.6 || 6.8 || 0.9 || 0.7 || 20.2
|- class=sortbottom
| style="text-align:left;" colspan=2| Career 
| 897 || 870 || 38.4 || .496 || .376 || .886 || 10.0 || 6.3 || 1.7 || 0.8 || 24.3
|-
 
Playoffs 
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1980
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 9 || 9 || 41.3 || .469 || .267 || .880 || 11.2 || 4.7 || 1.6 || 0.9 || 21.3
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1981†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 17 || 17 || 44.1 || .470 || .375 || .894 || 14.0 || 6.1 || 2.3 || 1.0 || 21.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1982
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 12 || 12 || 40.8 || .427 || .167 || .822 || 12.5 || 5.6 || 1.9 || 1.4 || 17.8
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1983
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 6 || 6 || 40.0 || .422 || .250 || .828 || 12.5 || 6.8 || 2.2 || 0.5 || 20.5
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1984†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || 41.8 || .524 || .412 || .879 || 11.0 || 5.9 || 2.3 || 1.2 || 27.5
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1985
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 20 || 20 || 40.8 || .461 || .280 || .890 || 9.1 || 5.8 || 1.7 || 1.0 || 26.0
|-
|  style="text-align:left; background:#afe6ba;"| 1986†
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 18 || 18 || 42.8 || .517 || .411 || .927 || 9.3 || 8.2 || 2.1 || 0.6 || 25.9
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1987
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 23 || style="background:#cfecec;"| 44.1 || .476 || .341 || .912 || 10.0 || 7.2 || 1.2 || 0.8 || 27.0
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1988
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 17 || 17 || 44.9 || .450 || .375 || .894 || 8.8 || 6.8 || 2.1 || 0.8 || 24.5
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1990
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 5 || 5 || 41.4 || .444 || .263 || .906 || 9.2 || 8.8 || 1.0 || 1.0 || 24.4
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1991
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 10 || 10 || 39.6 || .408 || .143 || .863 || 7.2 || 6.5 || 1.3 || 0.3 || 17.1
|-
| style="text-align:left;"| 1992
| style="text-align:left;"| Boston
| 4 || 2 || 26.8 || .500 || .000 || .750 || 4.5 || 5.3 || 0.3 || 0.5 || 11.3
|- class=sortbottom
| style="text-align:left;" colspan=2| Career 
| 164 || 162 || 42.0 || .472 || .321 || .890 || 10.3 || 6.5 || 1.8 || 0.9 || 23.8
|-
 
Career stats

Regular season:
Games: 897Win-Lost: 660-237Points: 21791Rebounds: 8974Assist: 5695
Playoffs:
Games: 164Win-Lost: 99-65Points: 3897Rebounds: 1683Assist: 1062
All-star games:
Games: 10Win-Lost: 8-2Points: 134Rebounds: 79Assist: 41
40 point games
Regular season

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 60 Win Atlanta Hawks Neutral       43 22 36 1 4 15 16 7 3 0 0 
2 53 Win Indiana Pacers Home    21 30 0  11 11     
3 50 Lost Dallas Mavericks Away   40 18 33 4 7 10 11 11 5 1 0 
4 50 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   39 19 25 1 1 11 12 13 7 0 0 
5 49 Win Washington Bullets Home   43 20 30 0 4 9 9 8 6 4 0 
6 49 Win Phoenix Suns Away   43 17 27 3 6 12 12 12 7 0 2 
7 49   Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   54 19 35 2 8 9 10 14 12 4 1 
8 48 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   42 20 32 0 2 8 9 14 5 1 1 
9 48 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   45 17 28 2 5 12 12 10 7 3 1 
10 48 Win Houston Rockets Home   43 17 32 0 2 14 15 15 7 2 0 
11 47   Lost Milwaukee Bucks Home    15 31 1  16 17 14    
12 47 Win Detroit Pistons Home   39 17 31 0 0 13 13 12 2 2 0 
13 47   Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   49 21 34 3 3 2 3 14 11 1 2 
14 47 Win New York Knicks Home   38 22 34 0 1 3 5 7 8 4 0 
15 47   Win Washington Bullets Away   53 19 29 1 2 8 10 8 7 2 0 
16 46 Win Orlando Magic Away   44 19 33 1 3 7 8 8 10 1 0 
17 45 Lost Phoenix Suns Away    19  3  4 4     
18 45 Win Indiana Pacers Away   45 18 31 1 3 8 11 12 5 5 0 
19 45 Win Charlotte Hornets Home   44 18 28 0 0 9 9 8 8 2 5 
20 44 Lost Houston Rockets Away   44 17 27 1 2 9 10 15 3 2 2 
21 44 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   44 17 35 1 5 9 9 11 8 1 0 
22 44 Win Chicago Bulls Home   40 19 29 0 0 6 6 10 3 1 1 
23 43 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Neutral       29 17 24 5 6 4 4 8 3 3 0 
24 43 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home   46 17 30 1 4 8 9 10 8 2 1 
25 43 Win New Jersey Nets Home   39 16 29 2 4 9 9 15 6 2 0 
26 43 Win Denver Nuggets Home   44 14 26 3 6 12 13 8 13 2 2 
27 42 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home       30 17 23 1 1 7 7 7 3  
28 42 Win Seattle SuperSonics Home   46 15 28 2 5 10 10 12 5 3 3 
29 42 Win Indiana Pacers Home   42 15 24 2 2 10 10 20 5 3 2 
30 41 Win Detroit Pistons Home    17  4  3 3     
31 41 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home    15 27 1  10 10 14    
32 41   Win Atlanta Hawks Away   40 15 27 2 4 9 11 7 6 3 2 
33 41   Win Chicago Bulls Away   46 17 29 1 1 6 6 7 7 3 1 
34 41 Win Golden State Warriors Home   43 15 24 3 6 8 10 10 5 2 0 
35 41 Win New York Knicks Home   44 17 30 3 3 4 4 6 5 3 0 
36 41 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home   43 15 21 1 2 10 10 10 4 0 0 
37 40 Win Detroit Pistons Neutral        18  0  4 5     
38 40 Win Dallas Mavericks Away   44 16 20 0  8 8 10 9 0 1 
39 40 Lost Denver Nuggets Away   46 14 28 0 2 12 13 9 6 0 0 
40 40 Win New Jersey Nets Home   46 15 28 3 7 7 8 7 7 1 0 
41 40 Win Atlanta Hawks Home   39 14 24 3 7 9 10 12 5 2 1 
42 40 Win New Jersey Nets Home   42 17 27 3 5 3 4 8 13 2 0 
43 40 Lost Denver Nuggets Home   40 16 25 0 5 8 8 13 1 2 1 
44 40 Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   40 18 27 1 2 3 4 13 5 2 0 
45 40 Win Seattle SuperSonics Home   46 17 27 2 5 4 4 11 10 1 2 
46 40 Win Utah Jazz Home   41 16 30 1 2 7 7 8 5 2 0 
47 40 Win Miami Heat Home   40 14 23 2 5 10 10 6 9 1 0 

Playoffs

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 43 Win Detroit Pistons Home   43 17 33 0 1 9 9 13 5 1 0 
2 42 Win Detroit Pistons Home   40 14 26 0 1 14 15 10 6 0 1 
3 42   Win Milwaukee Bucks Away   56 13 23 3 5 13 15 7 8 0 2 
4 40 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home   43 14 25 1 2 11 12 7 3 3 2 
5 40 Win Milwaukee Bucks Home   44 13 23 1 1 13 13 11 7 4 1 

Game-winners
Regular season

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 28 Win Denver Nuggets Away    13    2 2     
2 25 Win Detroit Pistons Home    11    3 3     
3 20   Win Philadelphia 76ers Away   40 7 22   6 6 15 7   
4 38 Win Phoenix Suns Away    14 25   9 9     
5 13 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home    6 11 1  0 0     
6 48 Win Portland Trail Blazers Home    17 28 2  12 12     
7 32 Win Detroit Pistons Home    11 23 1  9 9     
8 47   Win Portland Trail Blazers Away   49 21 34 3 3 2 3 14 11 1 2 
9 27 Win Seattle SuperSonics Away   41 10 19 3 3 4 5 8 6 1 0 
10 29 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Home   43 11 17 2 6 9 10 13 7 2 0 
11 47   Win Washington Bullets Away   53 19 29 1 2 8 10 8 7 2 0 
12 39 Win Dallas Mavericks Away   40 16 25 2 4 5 6 10 6 3 0 
13 27 Win Chicago Bulls Away   38 12 24 0 1 3 4 9 6 0 0 
14 10 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home   35 5 11 0 0 0 0 6 8 1 1 
15 27 Win Los Angeles Clippers Home   39 11 22 1 3 4 4 5 5 2 0 

Playoffs

Number Points Win/Lost Opponent Home/Away Date Minutes   played FGM FGA 3PM 3PA FTM FTA Rebounds Assists Steals Blocks 
1 23 Win Philadelphia 76ers Home    8    6 7     
2 34 Win Cleveland Cavaliers Away   42 11 17 0 1 12 14 14 7 1 0 

Career highs
Regular season

Stat High Opponent Date 
Points, game 60 Atlanta Hawks   
Points, half   37 Atlanta Hawks   
Points, quarter   24 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Points without a   free throw, quarter   19 Atlanta Hawks   
Consecutive points   16 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal percentage    
Field goals made 22 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goals made 22 vs. New York Knicks   
Field goals made, half   15 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goals made, half   15 vs. Washington Bullets   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Washington Bullets   
Field goal attempts 36 Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal attempts 36 vs. Chicago Bulls   
Field goal attempts, half   23 Atlanta Hawks   
Free throws made, none missed    
Free throws made, one missed 16—17 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made 16 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throw attempts    
Three-point field goals made 7 vs. Dallas Mavericks   
Three-point field goals made 7 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Three-point field goal attempts 10 three times 
Rebounds 21 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Rebounds 21 at Los Angeles Lakers   
Rebounds 21 at Denver Nuggets   
Rebounds 21   at Washington Bullets   
Offensive rebounds    
Defensive rebounds 18 at Chicago Bulls   
Defensive rebounds 18 vs. Indiana Pacers   
Assists 17 at Golden State Warriors   
Assists 16 vs. Cleveland Cavaliers   
Steals 9 at Utah Jazz   
Steals 8   at New Jersey Nets   
Steals 8 vs. New Jersey Nets   
Blocked shots    
Turnovers 10 at New York Knicks   
Minutes played    

Playoffs

Stat High Opponent Date 
Points 43 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Points, half   30 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Points, quarter   24 vs. Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal percentage    
Field goals made 17 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Field goals made 16 vs. New York Knicks   
Field goals made, quarter   10 vs. Atlanta Hawks   
Field goal attempts 33 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made, none missed 14—14 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made, one missed 14—15 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made 14 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throws made 14 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throws made, half   12 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Los Angeles Lakers   
Free throw attempts 15 at Los Angeles Lakers   
Free throw attempts 15 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Free throw attempts 15 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goals made 5 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goal attempts 6 vs. Milwaukee Bucks   
Three-point field goal attempts 6 at Milwaukee Bucks   
Rebounds 21 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Rebounds 21 vs. Houston Rockets   
Rebounds 21 vs. Houston Rockets   
Rebounds 21   at Los Angeles Lakers   
Offensive rebounds    
Defensive rebounds 19 at Philadelphia 76ers   
Assists 16 vs. New York Knicks   
Assists, half 11 vs. New York Knicks   
Steals 5 vs. Houston Rockets   
Steals 5 at Houston Rockets   
Steals 5 at New York Knicks   
Steals 5 vs. Detroit Pistons   
Blocked shots    
Turnovers 10 vs. Chicago Bulls   
Minutes played 56   at Milwaukee Bucks   

In popular culture

Bird has appeared in three movies, Blue Chips, released in 1994 by Paramount, the Warner Brothers film Space Jam with Michael Jordan and Bill Murray in 1996, and Celtic Pride with Dan Aykroyd, Daniel Stern, and Damon Wayans, which was also released in 1996. 
Bird's likeness has appeared in several video games. In One on One: Dr. J vs. Larry Bird, Bird plays opposite Julius Erving in a game of one-on-one. A sequel, Jordan vs Bird: One on One, was a 1988 basketball video game. In 2011, Bird was featured on the cover of NBA 2K12, alongside Magic Johnson and Michael Jordan. Bird is also playable character in the revamped NBA Jam. 
The band Dispatch has a song called "Just Like Larry" about Larry Bird, who is their hometown hero from his days as a member of the Boston Celtics. 
In a phone commercial when Larry Bird tells Tweety Bird that they are not related, Tweety not only comments on them having the same last name but that they "look an awful lot alike".
Larry Bird and Magic Johnson wrote a book together (with Jackie MacMullan) titled When The Game Was Ours.
In a commercial during Super Bowl XLIV, Dwight Howard and LeBron James challenge each other at trick shots for a McDonald's lunch. After they finish, clapping is heard, then the camera pans to the crowd and Bird says "Great show, guys. Thanks for lunch." Howard and James share a confused look. Howard asks, "Who was that?" James replies, "I have no idea." This refers to a McDonald's commercial from 1991 in which Bird and Michael Jordan have a trick shot contest, in which the winner got the lunch and the loser had to watch the winner eat. 
In October 2005, a man in Oklahoma City, Eric James Torpy, was convicted of shooting with intent to kill and robbery. He asked that his sentence be changed from 30 years imprisonment to 33 so that it would match Bird's jersey number. His request was granted. 
Twitter's logo is named Larry in honor of Larry Bird. 


See also 

List of National Basketball Association career scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career assists leaders
List of National Basketball Association career steals leaders
List of National Basketball Association career turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff assists leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff steals leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff free throw scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association players with most points in a game
List of National Basketball Association players with most steals in a game
List of NCAA Division I men's basketball players with 2000 points and 1000 rebounds
List of National Basketball Association season minutes leaders


References 
Further reading

 
 


External links 
 

 
 
 
Sportscentury's 30th greatest athlete of all time provided by ESPN.com
NBA.com: Where Legends Are Born
NBA History
CNN/Sports Illustrated: A Player for the Ages
1979 Oscar Robertson Trophy USBWA College Player of the Year
Videos of Larry Bird on mReplay.com
Larry Bird Statistics
Indiana Basketball Hall of Fame profile

 
  
DEFAULTSORT






















 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Puyi
 
 
 Puyi (Wade-Giles: Pu-i; 7 February 1906 – 17 October 1967), of the Manchu Aisin Gioro clan, was the last Emperor of China, and the twelfth and final ruler of the Qing Dynasty. He ruled as the Xuantong Emperor (Wade-Giles: Hsuan-tung Emperor) from 1908 until his abdication on 12 February 1912. From 1 to 12 July 1917 he was briefly restored to the throne as a nominal emperor by the warlord Zhang Xun. In 1934 he was declared the Kangde Emperor (Wade-Giles: Kang-te Emperor) of the puppet state of Manchukuo by the Empire of Japan, and he ruled until the end of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1945. After the People's Republic of China was established in 1949, Puyi was a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from 1964 until his death in 1967. Puyi's abdication in 1912 marked the end of millennia of dynastic rule in China and thus he is known throughout the world by the sobriquet "The Last Emperor".
Names and titles
NamesPuyi's name is romanised in English as either Puyi (in Hanyu Pinyin) or Pu-i (in Wades-Giles). This naming is in accordance with the Manchu tradition of avoiding the use of a person's clan name and given name together,  but is in complete contravention of Chinese tradition, whereby the given name of a ruler was considered taboo and ineffable. Using a former emperor's personal name (or even using a Chinese character from the name) was a punishable offence under traditional Chinese law. However after Puyi lost his imperial title in 1924, he was officially styled Mr. Puyi (Wade-Giles: Mr. Pu-i;  ) in Chinese and Mr. Fugi (溥儀先生; Fugi Sensei) in Japanese. His clan name Aisin Gioro ( ) was seldom used.Puyi also adopted Chinese style names — his zi (字; courtesy name) was Yaozhi (Wade-Giles: Yao-chih;  ), and his hao (號; pseudonym) was Haoran (Wade-Giles: Hao-jan;  ).Puyi is also known to have used a Western given name, Henry¹, which was chosen by his English language teacher, a Scotsman named Reginald Johnston.  
TitlesWhen he ruled as Emperor of the Qing Dynasty from 1908 to 1912 and during his brief restoration in 1917, Puyi's era name was Xuantong (Wade-Giles: Hsuan-tung), so he was known as the Xuantong Emperor (Wade-Giles: Hsuan-tung Emperor;  ) during those two periods of time.As Puyi was also the last ruling Emperor of China, he is widely known as The Last Emperor ( ) in China and throughout the rest of the world. Some refer to him as The Last Emperor of the Qing Dynasty ( ).Due to his abdication, Puyi is also known as Xun Di (Wade-Giles: Hsun Ti;  ) or Fei Di (Wade-Giles: Fei Ti;  ). Sometimes a Qing ( ) is added in front of the two titles to indicate his affiliation with the Qing Dynasty.When Puyi ruled the puppet state of Manchukuo from 1934 to 1945, his era name was Kangde (Wade-Giles: Kang-te), so he was known as the Kangde Emperor (Wade-Giles: Kang-te Emperor;  ) during that period of time.
Ancestry
Paternal side
Puyi's great-grandfather was the Daoguang Emperor (r. 1820–1850), who was succeeded by his fourth son, the Xianfeng Emperor (r. 1850–1861).      Puyi's paternal grandfather was Yixuan, Prince Chun (1840–1891), the seventh son of the Daoguang Emperor and a younger half-brother of the Xianfeng Emperor. The Xianfeng Emperor was succeeded by his only son, who became the Tongzhi Emperor (r. 1861–1875).   The Tongzhi Emperor died at the age of 18 without a son, and was succeeded by the Guangxu Emperor (r. 1875–1908), son of 1st Prince Chun and Lady Yehenara Wanzhen (younger sister of Empress Dowager Cixi). The Guangxu Emperor died without an heir.   Puyi, who succeeded the Guangxu Emperor, was the eldest son of Zaifeng, Prince Chun, who was born to Yixuan, Prince Chun and his second concubine Lady Lingiya (1866–1925). Lady Lingiya used to be a maid in the residence of Yixuan. Born a Han Chinese, her original family name was Liu (劉), and this was changed to the Manchu clan name Lingiya when she became the concubine of Yixuan. Zaifeng was therefore a younger half-brother of the Guangxu Emperor and the first in line to succession after Guangxu.   Puyi was in a branch of the Aisin Gioro clan with close ties to Empress Dowager Cixi, who was from the Yehenara clan. Cixi's niece, who later became Empress Dowager Longyu (1868–1913), was married to the Guangxu Emperor.Puyi had a younger full brother, Pujie (1907–1994), who married a cousin of Emperor Hirohito, Lady Hiro Saga. The rules of succession were changed to allow Pujie to succeed Puyi, who had no children.    Puyi's last surviving younger half-brother Puren (b. 1918) has adopted the Chinese name Jin Youzhi and currently still lives in China. In 2006 Jin Youzhi filed a lawsuit in regards to the rights to Puyi's image and privacy. The lawsuit claimed that those rights were violated by the exhibit "China's Last Monarch and His Family". Puyi's second cousin,  Pu Xuezhai (溥雪齋), was a musician who played the guqin, and an artist of Chinese painting. 
Maternal sidePuyi's mother was Youlan (1884–1921), the daughter of Ronglu (1836–1903), a statesman and general from the Guwalgiya clan. Ronglu was one of the leaders of the conservative faction in the Qing court, and a staunch supporter of Empress Dowager Cixi; Cixi rewarded his support by marrying his daughter, Puyi's mother, into the imperial family.The Guwalgiya clan was regarded as one of the most powerful Manchu clans in the Qing Dynasty. Oboi, an influential military commander and statesman who was a regent during the Kangxi Emperor's reign, was from the Guwalgiya clan.   
Chart showing the ancestors of Puyi 
  
 
Biography
Emperor of China (1908–1912)
Chosen by Empress Dowager Cixi on her deathbed,  Puyi became emperor at the age of 2 years and 10 months in December 1908 after the Guangxu Emperor died on 14 November. Titled the Xuantong Emperor (Wade-Giles: Hsuan-tung Emperor), Puyi's introduction to the life of an emperor began when palace officials arrived at his family residence to take him. The toddler Puyi screamed and resisted as the officials ordered the eunuch attendants to pick him up.    His father, Prince Chun, became Prince-Regent (摄政王). During Puyi's coronation in the Hall of Supreme Harmony, the young emperor was carried onto the throne by his father. Puyi was so frightened by the scene before him and the deafening sounds of ceremonial drums and music that he started crying. His father could do nothing except to quietly comfort him, "Don't cry, it'll be over soon."Puyi's wet nurse, Wen-Chao Wang, was the only one who could console him, and therefore she accompanied him to the Forbidden City. Puyi did not see his biological mother, Princess Consort Chun, for the next seven years. He developed a special bond with Wen-Chao Wang and credited her with being the only person who could control him. She was sent away when he was eight years old. After Puyi married, he would occasionally bring her to the Forbidden City, and later Manchukuo, to visit him. After his special government pardon in 1959, he visited her adopted son and only then learned of her personal sacrifices to be his nurse. Puyi's upbringing was hardly conducive to the raising of a healthy, well-balanced child. Overnight, he was treated as a god and unable to behave as a child. The adults in his life, except for his wet-nurse Wen-Chao Wang, were all strangers, remote, distant, and unable to discipline him. Wherever he went, grown men would kneel down in a ritual kowtow, averting their eyes until he passed. Soon the young Puyi discovered the absolute power he wielded over the eunuchs, and he frequently had them beaten for small transgressions. 
Eunuchs and the Household DepartmentQuotation of Puyi:   
 After his marriage, Puyi began to take control of the palace. He described "an orgy of looting" taking place that involved "everyone from the highest to the lowest". According to Puyi, by the end of his wedding ceremony, the pearls and jade in the empress's crown had been stolen.  Locks were broken, areas ransacked, and on June 27, 1923, a fire destroyed the area around the Palace of Established Happiness. Puyi suspected it was arson to cover theft. The emperor overheard conversations among the eunuchs that made him fear for his life. In response, he evicted the eunuchs from the palace.  His next plan of action was to reform the Household Department; the officials of which he appointed became so wealthy from theft and graft that they were able to run their own businesses outside the palace. 
AbdicationPuyi's father, Prince Chun, served as a regent until 6 December 1911 when Empress Dowager Longyu took over in the face of the Xinhai Revolution. Empress Dowager Longyu endorsed the "Imperial Edict of the Abdication of the Qing Emperor" (清帝退位詔書) on 12 February 1912, following the Xinhai Revolution, under a deal brokered by Yuan Shikai (a general of the Beiyang Army) with the imperial court in Beijing and the Republicans in southern China.    Signed with the new Republic of China, Puyi was to retain his imperial title and be treated by the government of the Republic with the protocol attached to a foreign monarch. This was similar to Italy's Law of Guarantees (1870) which accorded the Pope certain honors and privileges similar to those enjoyed by the King of Italy.    Puyi and the imperial court were allowed to remain in the northern half of the Forbidden City (the Private Apartments) as well as in the Summer Palace. A hefty annual subsidy of four million silver taels was granted by the Republic to the imperial household, although it was never fully paid and was abolished after just a few years.
The Articles of Favourable Treatment of the Great Qing Emperor after his AbdicationThe document is dated 26 December 1914. 

After the abdication of the Great Qing Emperor, his title of dignity is to be retained by the Republic of China with the courtesies which it is customary to accord to foreign monarchs.
After the abdication of the Great Qing Emperor, he will receive from the Republic of China an annual subsidy of 4,000,000 silver taels. After the reform of the currency this amount will be altered to $4,000,000 (max.).
After the abdication of the Great Qing Emperor, he may, as a temporary measure, continue to reside in the Palace (in the Forbidden City), but afterwards he will remove himself to the Summer Palace. He may retain his bodyguard.
After the abdication of the Great Qing Emperor, the temples and mausoleums of the imperial family with their appropriate sacrificial rites shall be maintained in perpetuity. The Republic of China will be responsible for the provision of military guards for their adequate protection.
As the Chong Mausoleum (崇陵) of the late Emperor Dezong (the Guangxu Emperor) has not yet been completed, the work will be carried out according to the proper regulations (relating to imperial tombs). The last ceremonies of sepulture will also be observed in accordance with the ancient rites. The actual expenses will all be borne by the Republic of China.
The services of all the persons of various grades hitherto employed in the Palace may be retained; but in future no eunuchs are to be added to the staff.
After the abdication of the Great Qing Emperor, his private property will be safeguarded and protected by the Republic of China.
The imperial guard corps as constituted at the time of the abdication will be placed under the military control of the War Office of the Republic of China. It will be maintained at its original strength and will receive the same emoluments as heretofore.


Brief restoration (1917)In 1917 the warlord Zhang Xun restored Puyi to the throne from July 1 to July 12.    Zhang Xun ordered his army to keep their queues to display loyalty to the emperor. During that period of time, a small bomb was dropped over the Forbidden City by a Republican plane, causing minor damage.  This is considered the first aerial bombardment ever in East Asia. The restoration failed due to extensive opposition across China, and the decisive intervention of another warlord, Duan Qirui.   Puyi was expelled from the Forbidden City in 1924 by the warlord Feng Yuxiang.   
Residence in Tianjin (1924–1932)Following his expulsion from the Forbidden City, Puyi spent a few days at the house of his father Prince Chun, and then temporarily resided in the Japanese embassy for a year and a half.  In 1925, he moved to the Quiet Garden Villa in the Japanese Concession in Tianjin.    During this period, Puyi and his advisers Chen Baochen, Zheng Xiaoxu and Luo Zhenyu discussed plans to restore Puyi as Emperor. Zheng and Luo favoured enlisting assistance from external parties, while Chen opposed the idea. In September 1931 Puyi sent a letter to Jirō Minami, the Japanese Minister of War, expressing his desire to be restored to the throne.  He was visited by Kenji Doihara, head of the espionage office of the Japanese Kwantung Army, who proposed establishing Puyi as head of a Manchurian state. In November 1931, Puyi and Zheng Xiaoxu traveled to Manchuria to complete plans for the puppet state of Manchukuo. The Chinese government ordered Puyi's arrest for treason, but was unable to breach the Japanese protection.  Chen Baochen returned to Beijing where he died in 1935.   
Ruler of Manchukuo (1932–1945)On 1 March 1932, Puyi was installed by the Japanese as the ruler of Manchukuo, a puppet state of the Empire of Japan, under the reign title Datong (Wade-Giles: Ta-tung; 大同). In 1934, he was officially crowned the emperor of Manchukuo under the reign title Kangde (Wade-Giles: Kang-te; 康德). He was constantly at odds with the Japanese in private, though submissive in public. He resented being "Head of State" and then "Emperor of Manchukuo" rather than being fully restored as a Qing Emperor. Puyi lived in a palace (now the Museum of the Imperial Palace of the Manchu State) in this period. At his enthronement he clashed with Japan over dress; they wanted him to wear a Manchukuo-style uniform whereas he considered it an insult to wear anything but traditional Manchu robes. In a typical compromise, he wore a Western military uniform to his enthronement  (the only Chinese emperor ever to do so) and a dragon robe to the announcement of his accession at the Temple of Heaven. Puyi's younger full brother Pujie, who married Lady Hiro Saga, a distant cousin to the Japanese Emperor Hirohito, was proclaimed heir apparent. The marriage had been politically arranged by Shigeru Honjō, a general of the Kwantung Army. Puyi thereafter would not speak candidly in front of his brother and refused to eat any food provided by Hiro Saga. Puyi was forced to sign an agreement that if he himself had a male heir, the child would be sent to Japan to be raised by the Japanese. 
From 1935 to 1945 Kwantung Army senior staff officer Yoshioka Yasunori (吉岡安則)    was assigned to Puyi as Attaché to the Imperial Household in Manchukuo. He acted as a spy for the Japanese government, controlling Puyi through fear, intimidation, and direct orders.  There were many attempts on Puyi's life during this period, including a 1937 stabbing by a palace servant.  During Puyi's reign as Emperor of Manchukuo, his household was closely watched by the Japanese, who increasingly took steps toward the full Japanisation of Manchuria, to prevent him from becoming too independent. He was feted by the Japanese populace during his visits there, but had to remain subservient to Emperor Hirohito.  It is unclear whether the adoption of ancient Chinese styles and rites, such as using "His Majesty" instead of his real name, was the product of Puyi's interest or a Japanese imposition of their own imperial house rules.During these years, Puyi began taking a greater interest in traditional Chinese law and religion  (such as Confucianism and Buddhism), but this was disallowed by the Japanese. Gradually his old supporters were eliminated and pro-Japanese ministers put in their place.  During this period Puyi's life consisted mostly of signing laws prepared by Japan, reciting prayers, consulting oracles, and making formal visits throughout his state.   
Later life (1945–1967)
At the end of World War II, Puyi was captured by the Soviet Red Army on 16 August 1945 while he was in an airplane fleeing to Japan.    The Soviets took him to the Siberian town of Chita. He lived in a sanatorium, then later taken to Khabarovsk near the Chinese border.In 1946, he testified at the International Military Tribunal for the Far East in Tokyo,    detailing his resentment of how he had been treated by the Japanese.When the Chinese Communist Party under Mao Zedong came to power in 1949, Puyi was repatriated to China after negotiations between the Soviet Union and China.       Except for a period during the Korean War, when he was moved to Harbin, Puyi spent ten years in the Fushun War Criminals Management Centre in Liaoning province until he was declared reformed. Puyi came to Peking in 1959 with special permission from Chairman Mao Zedong and lived the next six months in an ordinary Peking residence with his sister before being transferred to a government-sponsored hotel. He voiced his support for the Communists and worked at the Peking Botanical Gardens. At the age of 56, he married Li Shuxian, a hospital nurse, on  30 April 1962, in a ceremony held at the Banquet Hall of the Consultative Conference. He subsequently worked as an editor for the literary department of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, where his monthly salary was around 100 yuan,    an office in which he served from 1964 until his death.With encouragement from Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai, and openly endorsed by the Chinese government, Puyi wrote his autobiography Wo De Qian Ban Sheng ( ; translated in English as From Emperor to Citizen) in the 1960s together with Li Wenda, an editor of Peking's People Publishing Bureau. In the Oxford University edition of the book, in the chapter I Refuse to Admit My Guilt, he made this statement regarding his testimony at the Tokyo war crimes trial:    
 I now feel very ashamed of my testimony, as I withheld some of what I knew to protect myself from being punished by my country. I said nothing about my secret collaboration with the Japanese imperialists over a long period, an association to which my open capitulation after September 18, 1931 was but the conclusion. Instead, I spoke only of the way the Japanese had put pressure on me and forced me to do their will.  I maintained that I had not betrayed my country but had been kidnapped; denied all my collaboration with the Japanese; and even claimed that the letter I had written to Jirō Minami was a fake.    I covered up my crimes in order to protect myself.  
Death and burial
Mao Zedong started the Cultural Revolution in 1966, and the youth militia known as the Red Guards saw Puyi, who symbolised Imperial China, as an easy target of attack. Puyi was placed under protection by the local public security bureau, although his food rations, salary, and various luxuries, including his sofa and desk, were removed.  Puyi became affected physically and emotionally. He died in Peking of complications arising from kidney cancer and heart disease on 17 October 1967 at the age of 61. In accordance with the laws of the People's Republic of China at the time, Puyi's body was cremated. His ashes were first placed at the Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery, alongside those of other party and state dignitaries. (This was the burial ground of imperial concubines and eunuchs prior to the establishment of the People's Republic of China.)In 1995, as a part of a commercial arrangement, Puyi's widow transferred his ashes to a new commercial cemetery in return for monetary support. The cemetery is located near the Western Qing Tombs,   southwest of Peking, where four of the nine Qing emperors preceding him are interred, along with three empresses and 69 princes, princesses and imperial concubines.   
FamilyQuotation of Puyi: 
 
The Pedigree of the Qing House flow chart can be found in Puyi's autobiography. 
SiblingsPuyi had three younger brothers:

Pujie (1907–1994), Puyi's only full brother, courtesy name Junzhi (俊之), English name William. He married Tangshixia (唐石霞; courtesy name Yiying 怡瑩), divorced later. He married Hiro Saga and had two daughters. He had a minor role in the government of Manchukuo.
Puqi ( ; 1915–1918), died before he turned three years old.
Puren ( ; b. 1918), changed his name to Jin Youzhi. He married Jin Yuting (金瑜庭) and had three sons and two daughters.

Puyi had seven younger sisters, only the first three were his full sisters:

Yunying ( ; 1909–1925), married Empress Wanrong's older brother Runliang (潤良), had no children.
Yunhe ( ; 1911–2001), changed her name to Jin Xinru (金欣如). She married Zheng Guangyuan (鄭廣元) and had a son and three daughters.
Yunying ( ; 1913–1992), changed her name to Jin Ruixiu (金蕊秀), English name Lily. She married Empress Wanrong's younger brother Runqi (潤麒) and had two sons and a daughter.
Yunxian ( ; 1914–2003), changed her name to Jin Yunxian (金韞嫻). She married Zhao Qifan (趙琪璠) and had a son and a daughter.
Yunxing ( ; 1917–1998), changed her name to Jin Ruijie (金蕊潔). She married Wan Jiaxi (萬嘉熙) and had three sons and a daughter.
Yunyu ( ; 1919–1982), changed her name to Pu Yunyu (溥韞娛), courtesy name Ruile (蕊樂). She married Wanyan Ailan (完顏愛蘭) and had a son and four daughters.
Yunhuan ( ; 1921–2004), infant name Ji (姞), changed her name to Jin Zhijian (金志堅), courtesy name Ruihan (蕊莟), pseudonym Biyue (璧月). She married Qiao Hongzhi (喬宏志) and had two sons and a daughter.


Spouses

Wanrong (1906–1946), married Puyi in 1922, was his Empress.
Wenxiu (1909–1953), married Puyi in 1922, was his Consort Shu (淑妃).
Tan Yuling (1920–1942), married Puyi in 1937, was his Concubine Xiang (祥貴人).
Li Yuqin (1928–2001), married Puyi in 1943, was his Concubine Fu (福貴人).
Li Shuxian (1925–1997), married Puyi in 1962.

Quotation of Puyi (referring only to his first four wives): Pu Yi 1988, p 310 
 

In detail

:In 1921, it was decided by the Dowager Consorts (the four widows of the emperors before Puyi) that it was time for the 15 year old Puyi to be married, although court politics dragged the complete process (from selecting the bride, up through the wedding ceremony) out for almost two years. Puyi saw marriage as his coming of age benchmark, when others would no longer control him. He was given four photographs to choose from. Puyi stated they all looked alike to him, with the exception of different clothing. He chose Wenxiu. Political factions within the palace made the actual choice as to whom Puyi would marry. The selection process alone took an entire year. 
WanrongPuyi's second choice for his wife was Wanrong, a Daur. She married Puyi in 1922 and became his Empress. Her father, Rong Yuan (榮源), was a Minister of Domestic Affairs. She was considered beautiful and came from a wealthy family. By Puyi's own account, he abandoned Wanrong in the bridal chamber and went back to his own room.  He maintained that she was willing to be a wife in name only, in order to carry the title of Empress. The couple's relationship was good initially, and Puyi showed preference over Wenxiu for Wanrong and displayed trust in her. However after Wenxiu left in 1931, Puyi blamed Wanrong and stopped speaking to her and ignored her presence.  She became addicted to opium, and eventually died in a prison in Yanji, Jilin after being arrested by Chinese Communist soldiers.   
WenxiuPuyi's first choice for his wife was Wenxiu, from the Erdet (鄂爾德特) clan. She married Puyi in 1922. Although she was Puyi's first choice, the Four Dowager Consorts felt that Wenxiu came from an unacceptable impoverished family and was not beautiful enough to be Empress, so they told the court officials to ask Puyi to choose again. The second time Puyi chose Wanrong, who became Empress, while Wenxiu was designated as Consort Shu (淑妃). Puyi and Wenxiu divorced in 1931. Puyi awarded her a house in Beijing and $300,000 in alimony, to be provided by the Japanese.  In his autobiography, Puyi stated her reason for the divorce was the emptiness of life with him in exile, her desire for an ordinary family life, and his own inability to see women as anything but slaves and tools of men. Puyi related that she never re-married, became a primary school teacher, and died in 1953. 
Tan YulingPuyi's third wife, Tan Yuling, was a Manchu of the Tatara (他他拉) clan. She married Puyi in 1937 at the age of 16 on the recommendation of the daughter of Yulang (毓朗), a beile. She was designated as Puyi's Concubine Xiang (祥貴人). Puyi married her as "punishment" for Wanrong, and, "...because a second wife was as essential as palace furniture." She was also a wife in name only. She became ill in 1942 with typhoid, which the Japanese doctor said would not be fatal. After the doctor's consultation with Attaché to the Imperial Household Yasunori Yoshioka, Tan Yuling suddenly died. Puyi became suspicious of the circumstances when the Japanese immediately offered him photographs of Japanese girls for marriage.  Puyi posthumously granted her the title Noble Consort Mingxian (明賢貴妃).
Li YuqinIn 1943 Puyi married his fourth wife, a 15-year-old student named Li Yuqin, who was a Han Chinese from Changchun, Jilin. She was designated as Puyi's Concubine Fu (福貴人).  In February 1943, school principal Kobayashi and teacher Fujii of the Nan-Ling Girls Academy took ten girl students to a photography studio for portraits. Three weeks later, the school teacher and the principal visited Li Yuqin's home and told her Puyi ordered her to go to the Manchukuo palace to study. She was first taken directly to Yasunori Yoshioka who thoroughly questioned her. Yoshioka then drove her back to her parents and told them Puyi ordered her to study at the palace. Money was promised to the parents. She was subjected to a medical examination and then taken to Puyi's sister Yunhe and instructed in palace protocol.    Two years later when Manchukuo collapsed, Li Yuqin shared a train with Empress Wanrong, who was experiencing opium withdrawal symptoms at the time. They were both arrested by the Soviets and sent to a prison in Changchun. Li Yuqin was released in 1946 and sent back home. She worked in a textile factory while she studied the works of Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin. In 1955 she began visiting Puyi in prison. After applying to the Chinese authorities for a divorce, the government responded on her next prison visit by showing her to a room with a double bed and ordered her to reconcile with Puyi, and she said the couple obeyed the order. She divorced Puyi in May 1957. She later married a technician, and had two sons.    During the Cultural Revolution she became a target for attack by the Red Guards because she used to be Puyi's concubine. She died of liver problems in 2001.
Li ShuxianIn 1962 under the arrangement of Zhou Enlai, Puyi married his fifth and last wife, Li Shuxian, a nurse of Han Chinese ethnicity. They had no children. She died of lung cancer in 1997.  Li Shuxian recounted that they dated for six months before the marriage, and she found him to be, "...a man who desperately needed my love and was ready to give me as much love as he could."   
Bibliography
By Puyi

The autobiography of Puyi – ghost-written by Li Wenda. The title of the Chinese book is usually rendered in English as From Emperor to Citizen. The book was re-released in China in 2007 in a new corrected and revised version. Many sentences which had been deleted from the 1964 version prior to its publication were now included.
    – original
    – translation


By others

 
Johnston, Reginald Fleming (1934, 2008). Twilight in the Forbidden City. Soul Care Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9680459-5-4
 
Puyi's fifth wife Li Shuxian. Memories of their life together were ghost written by Wang Qingxian. An English version translated by Ni Na was published by China Travel and Tourism Press.
 
Companion to Bernardo Bertolucci's film of the same name.


Portrayal in media
Film

The Last Emperor (Chinese title 火龍, literally means Fire Dragon), a 1986 Hong Kong film directed by Li Han-hsiang. Tony Leung Ka-fai played Puyi.



The Last Emperor, a 1987 film directed by Bernardo Bertolucci. John Lone played the adult Puyi.



Aisin-Gioro Puyi (愛新覺羅·溥儀), a 2005 Chinese documentary film on the life of Puyi. Produced by CCTV, it was part of a series of ten documentary films about ten historical persons.



The Founding of a Party, a 2011 Chinese film directed by Huang Jianxin and Han Sanping. Child actor Yan Ruihan played Puyi.



1911, a 2011 historical film directed by Jackie Chan and Zhang Li. The film tells of the founding of the Republic of China when Sun Yat-sen led the Xinhai Revolution to overthrow the Qing Dynasty. The five year old Puyi is played by child actor Su Hanye. Although Puyi's time on screen is short, there are significant scenes showing how the emperor was treated at court before his abdication at the age of six.   


Television

The Misadventure of Zoo, a 1981 Hong Kong television series produced by TVB. Adam Cheng played an adult Puyi.



Modai Huangdi (末代皇帝; literally means The Last Emperor), a 1988 Chinese television series based on Puyi's autobiography From Emperor to Citizen, with Puyi's brother Pujie as a consultant for the series. Chen Daoming starred as Puyi.



Feichang Gongmin (非常公民; literally means Extraordinary Citizen), a 2002 Chinese television series directed by Cheng Hao. Dayo Wong starred as Puyi.



Ruten no Ōhi — Saigo no Kōtei (流転の王妃·最後の皇弟; Chinese title 流轉的王妃), a 2003 Japanese television series about Pujie and Hiro Saga. Wang Bozhao played Puyi.



Modai Huangfei (末代皇妃; literally means The Last Imperial Consort), a 2003 Chinese television series. Li Yapeng played Puyi.


See also 

Dynasties in Chinese history
List of monarchs who lost their thrones in the 20th and 21st centuries
List of heads of regimes who were later imprisoned
 
Notes¹ Aisin-Gioro is the clan's name in Manchu, pronounced Àixīn Juéluó in Mandarin; Pǔyí is the Chinese given name as pronounced in Mandarin.
References 
External links 

 
Royalty.nu: Extended Bio
TIME: Last Emperor's Humble Occupation
Li Xin, Pu Yi's Widow Reveals Last Emperor's Soft Side
Pu Ru (溥儒), Pu Yi's cousin, accomplished Chinese brush painter and calligrapher
 
 
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
  
DEFAULTSORT




















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Lee Teng-hui
 
 
  
Lee Teng-hui ( ; born 15 January 1923), sometimes called the "father of Taiwan's democracy",   is a politician of the Republic of China (commonly known as Taiwan). He was the President of the Republic of China and Chairman of the Kuomintang (KMT) from 1988 to 2000. He presided over major advancements in democratic reforms including his own re-election which marked the first direct presidential election for the Republic of China.  The first native Taiwanese to become ROC president and KMT chairman, Lee promoted the Taiwanese localization movement and led an aggressive foreign policy to gain diplomatic allies. Critics accused him of betraying the party he headed, secret support of Taiwanese independence, and involvement in corruption (black gold politics).After leaving office Lee was expelled from the KMT for his role in founding the pro-independence Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU), which forms part of the Pan-Green Coalition alongside Taiwan's Democratic Progressive Party. (Lee is considered the "spiritual leader" of the TSU.) Lee has been outspoken in support for Taiwanese independence though not necessarily a formal declaration.
Early life and education

 
Lee was born to a Hakka family    in the rural farming community of Sanzhi (Sanshi-kyō), Taipei County (Taihoku, now New Taipei City), Taiwan. As a child, he often dreamed of traveling abroad, and became an avid stamp collector. Growing up during the Japanese rule of Taiwan, he developed a strong affinity for Japan. His father was a middle-level Japanese police aide, and his brother joined police academy and soon volunteered as for the Imperial Japanese Navy and died in Manila.  Lee—one of only four Taiwanese students in Taipei high school class—graduated with honors and was given a scholarship to Japan's Kyoto Imperial University. During his school days, he learned kendo and busido.  A lifelong collector of books, Lee was heavily influenced by Japanese thinkers like Nitobe Inazo and Nishida Kitaro in Kyoto. In 1944 he too volunteered for service in the Imperial Japanese Army and became a second lieutenant officer of an anti-aircraft gun in Taiwan. He was ordered back to Japan in 1945 and participated in the clean-up after the great Tokyo firebombing of March, 1945. Lee stayed in Japan after the surrender and graduated from Kyoto Imperial University in 1946.After World War II, after the Republic of China took over Taiwan, Lee enrolled in the National Taiwan University, where in 1948 he earned a bachelor's degree in agricultural science. Lee joined the Communist Party of China (CPC) in September 1946, apparently briefly. He participated in the 228 Incident during this time.  According to Wu Ketai, who inducted Lee into the Communist Party, the KMT was aware that Lee had been a Communist, but deliberately destroyed the records when Lee was promoted to the vice-presidency to protect his image.  In a 2002 interview Lee himself admitted that he had been a communist. In that same interview Lee said that he has strongly opposed communism for a long time because he understands the theory well and knows that it is doomed to fail.  Lee stated that he joined the Communist out of hatred for the KMT. In 1953, Lee received a master's degree in agricultural economics from the Iowa State University in the United States. Lee returned to Taiwan in 1957 as an economist with the Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction (JCRR), an institution sponsored by the U.S. and aimed at modernizing Taiwan's agricultural system and at land reform. During this period, he also worked as an adjunct professor in the Department of Economics at National Taiwan University and taught at the Graduate School of East Asian Studies at National Chengchi University.In the mid-1960s Lee returned to the United States, and earned a PhD in agricultural economics from Cornell University in 1968. Lee's doctoral dissertation, Intersectoral Capital Flows in the Economic Development of Taiwan, 1895–1960  (published as a book under the same name) was honored as the year's best doctoral thesis by the American Association of Agricultural Economics and remains an influential work on Taiwan's economy during the Japanese and early KMT periods.Lee encountered Christianity as a young man and in 1961 was baptised. For most of the rest of his political career, despite holding high office, Lee has made a habit of giving sermons at churches around Taiwan, mostly on apolitical themes of service and humility.Lee speaks Mandarin, Taiwanese, Japanese and English.
Rise to powerShortly after returning to Taiwan, Lee joined the KMT in 1971 and was made a cabinet minister without portfolio responsible for agriculture.In 1978 Lee was appointed Mayor of Taipei, where he solved water shortages and improved the city's irrigation problems. In 1981, he became governor of Taiwan Province and made further irrigation improvements.As a skilled technocrat, Lee soon caught the eye of President Chiang Ching-kuo as a strong candidate to serve as Vice President. Chiang sought to move more authority to the bensheng ren (residents on Taiwan before 1949 and their descendants) instead of continuing to promote  waisheng ren (mainland Chinese immigrants who arrived in Taiwan after 1949 and their descendants) as his father had. President Chiang nominated Lee to become his Vice President. Lee was formally elected by the National Assembly in 1984.
PresidencyChiang Ching-kuo died in January 1988 and Lee succeeded him as President. The "Palace Faction" of the KMT, a group of conservative mainlanders headed by General Hau Pei-tsun, Premier Yu Kuo-hwa, and Education Minister Lee Huan, was deeply distrustful of Lee Teng-hui and sought to block his accession to the KMT chairmanship and sideline him as a figurehead. With the help of James Soong—himself a member of the Palace Faction—who quieted the hardliners with the famous plea "Each day of delay is a day of disrespect to Ching-kuo," Lee was allowed to ascend to the chairmanship unobstructed. At the KMT party congress of July 1988, Lee named 31 members of the Central Committee, 16 of whom were --bensheng ren: for the first time, bensheng ren held a majority in what was then a powerful policy-making body.As he consolidated power during the early years of his presidency, Lee allowed his rivals within the KMT to occupy positions of influence: when Yu Guo-hwa retired as premier in 1989, he was replaced by Lee Huan, who was succeeded by Hau Pei-tsun in 1990. At the same time, Lee made a major reshuffle of the Executive Yuan, as he had done with the KMT Central Committee, replacing several elderly waisheng ren with younger bensheng ren, mostly of technical backgrounds. Fourteen of these new appointees, like Lee, received Ph.D.s in the United States. Prominent among the appointments were Lien Chan as foreign minister, and Shirley Kuo as finance minister.1990 saw the arrival of the Wild Lily student movement on behalf of full democracy for Taiwan. Thousands of Taiwanese students demonstrated for democratic reforms. The demonstrations culminated in a sit-in demonstration by over 300,000 students at Memorial Square in Taipei. Students called for direct elections of the national president and vice president and for a new election for all legislative seats. On 21 March Lee welcomed some of the students to the Presidential Building. He expressed his support of their goals and pledged his commitment to full democracy in Taiwan. The moment is regarded by supporters of democracy in Taiwan as perhaps his finest moment in office. Gatherings recalling the student movement are regularly held around Taiwan every 21 March.In May 1991 Lee spearheaded a drive to eliminate the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion, laws put in place following the KMT arrival in 1949 that suspended the democratic functions of the government. In December 1991 the original members of the Legislative Yuan, elected to represent mainland China constituencies in 1948, were forced to resign and new elections were held to apportion more seats to the bensheng ren. The elections forced Hau Pei-tsun from the premiership, a position he was given in exchange for his tacit support of Lee. He was replaced by Lien Chan, then an ally of Lee.The prospect of the first island-wide democratic election the next year, together with Lee's June 1995 visit to Cornell University, sparked the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis. The previous eight presidents and vice presidents of the ROC had been elected by the members of the National Assembly. For the first time the President of the ROC would be elected by majority vote of Taiwan's population. The People's Republic of China conducted a series of missile tests in the waters surrounding Taiwan and other military maneuvers off the coast of Fujian in response to what Communist Party leaders described as moves by Lee to "split the motherland." The PRC government launched another set of tests just days before the election, sending missiles over the island to express its dissatisfaction should the Taiwanese people vote for Lee. The military actions disrupted trade and shipping lines and caused a temporary dip in the Asian stock market. Ironically, the 1996 missile launches boosted support for Lee instead.On 23 March 1996, Lee became the first popularly elected ROC president with 54% of the vote. Many people who worked or resided in other countries made special trips back to the island to vote. In addition to the president, the governor of Taiwan Province and the mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung (as leaders of provincial level divisions they were formerly appointed by the president) became popularly elected.Lee, in an interview that same year, expressed his view that a special state-to-state relationship existed between Taiwan and mainland China that all negotiations between the two sides of the Strait needed to observe.Lee, observing constitutional term limits he had helped enact, stepped down from the presidency at the end of his term in 2000. That year Democratic Progressive Party candidate Chen Shui-bian won the national election with 39% of the vote in a three-way race. Chen's victory marked an end to KMT rule and the first peaceful transfer of power in Taiwan's new democratic system.Supporters of rival candidates Lien Chan and James Soong accused Lee of setting up the split in the KMT that had enabled Chen to win. Lee had promoted the uncharismatic Lien over the popular Soong as the KMT candidate. Soong had subsequently ran as an independent and was expelled from the KMT. The number of votes garnered by both Soong and Lien would have accounted for approximately 60% of the vote while individually the candidates placed behind Chen. Protests were staged in front of the KMT party headquarters in Taipei. Fuelling this anger were the persistent suspicions following Lee throughout his presidency that he secretly supported Taiwan independence and that he was intentionally sabotaging the Kuomintang from above.  Lee resigned his chairmanship on 24 March and was expelled as a party member in December of the same year. KMT officials expressed dissatisfaction with efforts to "localize" the KMT and his tacit support of the new Chen administration.Since leaving office Lee and the new party he went on to found, the TSU, have generally supported "green" causes in Taiwan. Lee continues to travel, make speeches, campaign for TSU candidates, and offer independent-minded commentary on Taiwan politics. Lee Teng-Hui University in Taiwan is named after him.
TaiwanizationLee Teng-hui, during his term as president, supported Taiwanization.  The Taiwanization movement has its roots in the home rule and independence groups founded during the Japanese era and sought to put emphasis on Taiwan as the center of people's lives as opposed to China or Japan. During the Chiang regime, China was promoted as the center of an ideology that would build a Chinese national outlook in a people who had once considered themselves Japanese subjects. Taiwan was often relegated to a backwater province of China in the KMT-supported history books. People were discouraged from studying local Taiwanese customs, which were to be replaced by mainstream Chinese customs. Lee sought to turn Taiwan into a center rather than an appendage. This shift was widely supported in Taiwan and found expression in Taiwanese literature movement. He further stated that he believed a Chinese identity and a Taiwanese identity were ultimately incompatible, a notion controversial in the KMT, even among those members who generally supported Taiwanization.
After the presidencySince resigning the chairmanship of the KMT, Lee has campaigned actively on behalf of pan-green coalition candidates and opposed candidates of his former party who took pro-unification positions during the 2004 presidential elections. He has stated a number of political positions and ideas which he did not mention while he was President, but which he appeared to have privately maintained.Lee has publicly supported the Name Rectification Campaigns in Taiwan and proposed changing the name of the country from the Republic of China to the Republic of Taiwan. He generally opposes unlimited economic ties with mainland China, though he supports trade.Lee has also stated that he believes that Taiwan cannot avoid being assimilated into the People's Republic of China unless it completely rejects its historical Chinese identity and that he believes that it is essential that Taiwanese unite and develop a unified and separate identity other than the Chinese one. Furthermore, in reference to Mainlanders, he believes that to be truly Taiwanese, one must assume a "New Taiwanese" identity.He dismisses both the notion that the strategy will trigger an invasion by the Chinese government and the notion that Taiwan benefits economically by developing economic ties with China. He argues the People's Republic of China is a paper tiger and both its military strength and economic strength have been far overestimated. Lee asserts that when presented with a united and assertive Taiwan, Taiwan will receive support from the international community and also from the United States and that the PRC will be obliged to back down. He also believes that the PRC economy is doomed to collapse and that unlimited integration with the PRC economy, on the part of Taiwan or any country, is unwise.During the 2004 Presidential campaign, President Chen Shui-bian publicly campaigned with Lee Teng-hui and developed a campaign platform, including a call for a new constitution adopted by referendum, which could be interpreted as an opportunity to make the symbolic changes which Lee supports. There was concern in the United States and in the People's Republic of China that Chen would be supportive of Lee's positions, a belief which was reinforced by Lee's own actions while President and by Lee's public statements that Chen Shui-bian agreed with him.The concern shared between the United States and the People's Republic of China was the possible unilateral change of the cross-strait status quo by President Chen, leading to a public rebuke of Chen from the United States President George W. Bush in December 2003. It is believed that this rebuke in part was intended to challenge the notion, which Lee had advanced, that American support of Taiwan was unconditional.  After his close election in March 2004, Chen moved to distance himself from Lee, by stating explicitly that his regime's constitutional reforms would not rename "The Republic of China" to Taiwan. The difference in the two leader's positions was further highlighted by Chen's stated intent to establish greater economic links with China.In February 2007 Lee shocked the media when he announced that he has never backed Taiwanese independence, when he was widely seen as the spiritual leader of the movement.  Lee also said that he supported opening up trade and tourism with China, a position he had opposed before. Lee later explained that Taiwan already enjoys de facto independence and that political maneuvering over details of expressing it is counterproductive. He maintains that "Taiwan should seek 'normalization' by changing its name and amending its constitution." 
Japanese supportLee enjoys a warm relationship with the people and culture of Japan. Lee often assures Taiwanese audiences that Japan will support Taiwan if it formally announces its Taiwan independence. Taiwan was colonized by Japan from 1895 to 1945 and natives of the island who grew up in that period, such as Lee, attended schools where Japanese language, songs, and stories were taught. Lee's father was a low-level Japanese police aide; his older brother died serving in the Imperial Japanese Navy in World War II and is listed in Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo. During his youth Lee had a Japanese name,  .  Lee speaks fondly of his upbringing and his teachers and has been welcomed in visits to Japan since leaving office. Lee's admiration and enjoyment of all things Japanese has been the target of criticism from both the Pan-Green Coalition and Pan-Blue Coalition in Taiwan, as well as from mainland China, due to the anti-Japanese sentiment formed during and after World War II.In August 2001, Lee said of Junichiro Koizumi's controversial visit to Yasukuni shrine, "It is natural for a premier of a country to commemorate the souls of people who lost their lives for their country". In 2002, Lee remarked "the Senkaku Islands are the territory of Japan."         In November 2004, Lee became the first former president of a country known to participate in cosplay.    The cosplay was centered on  ,  a hawkish principal of a boarding school in the Japanese manga   (Weekly Shōnen Jump). His cosplay interest and eponymous "school" called "輝!李塾" was mentioned on his personal website, beginning in late 2004. This manga comic was a comedy centered on a fictitious reform school for contemporary boys, modelled under the Imperial Japanese Army.In a May 2007 trip to Japan, Lee visited the  Yasukuni Shrine to pay tribute to his older brother. Controversy rose because the Shrine also enshrines World War II Class A criminals among the other soldiers.  He is also expected to receive the first Shimpei Goto award,  named after the former Japanese colonial governor of Taiwan, and to give a speech on 7 June regarding the global situation and visited Yasukuni shrine again after 2007.     During the 2012 China anti-Japanese demonstrations, on September 13, 2012, Lee remarked "The Senkaku islands were Japanese territory in the past and are still so at present." 
IndictmentOn 30 June 2011, Lee, along with former KMT financier Liu Tai-Ying were indicted on graft and money-laundering charges and accused of embezzling US$7.79 million in public funds. 
CancerIn late 2011, Lee underwent surgery to remove colon adenocarcinoma, the most common form of colon cancer. Doctors are hopeful the stage II tumor was detected early. 
See also 

President of the Republic of China
History of the Republic of China
Politics of the Republic of China
Special state-to-state relations
Kuomintang


References 
External links

Biography from Office of the President, ROC
Friends of Lee Teng-Hui Association
Lee Teng-Hui Academy
America and Taiwan, 1943–2004
Cornell University Magazine Profile
[1]
[2]

 
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
DEFAULTSORT





















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Pierre Schaeffer
 Pierre Henri Marie Schaeffer ( English pronunciation:   ; 14 August 1910 – 19 August 1995)  was a French composer, writer, broadcaster, engineer, musicologist and acoustician. His innovative work in both the sciences—particularly communications and acoustics—and the various arts of music, literature and radio presentation after the end of World War II, as well as his anti-nuclear activism and cultural criticism garnered him widespread recognition in his lifetime.Amongst the vast range of works and projects he undertook, Schaeffer is most widely and currently recognized for his accomplishments in electronic and experimental music,  at the core of which stands his role as the chief developer of a unique and early form of avant-garde music known as musique concrète.      The genre emerged out of Europe from the utilization of new music technology developed in the post-Nazi Germany era, following the advance of electroacoustic and acousmatic music.Schaeffer's writings (which include written and radio-narrated essays, biographies, short novels, a number of musical treatises and several plays)   "Schaeffer taught electronic composition at the Paris Conservatory from 1968 until 1980. His writings include novels, short stories, and essays, as well as theoretical works in music, such as À la recherche d’une musique concrète (1952; 'In Search of a Concrete Music”'), Traité des objets musicaux (1966; 'Treatise on Musical Objects'), and the two-volume Machines à communiquer (1970–72; 'Machines for Communicating')."        are often oriented towards his development of the genre, as well as the theoretics and philosophy of music in general.     Today, Schaeffer is considered one of the most influential experimental, electroacoustic and subsequently electronic musicians, having been the first composer to utilize a number of contemporary recording and sampling techniques that are now used worldwide by nearly all record production companies.    His collaborative endeavors are considered milestones in the histories of electronic and experimental music.
Life
Early life and education
Schaeffer was born in Nancy in 1910.  His parents were both musicians (his father a violinist; his mother, a singer),      and at first it seemed that Pierre would also take on music as a career. However his parents discouraged his musical pursuits from childhood and had him educated in engineering.  He studied at several universities in this inclination, the first of which was Lycée Saint-Sigisbert located in his hometown of Nancy. Afterwards he moved westwards in 1929 to the École Polytechnique in Paris      and finally completed his education in the capital at the École supérieure d'électricité, in 1934.     Schaeffer received a diploma in radio broadcasting from the École Polytechnique.  He may have also received a similar qualification from the École nationale supérieure des télécommunications, although it is not verifiable as to whether or not he ever actually attended this university.   
First experimentations and work in broadcasting and engineering; marriage and fatherhood
Later in 1934 Schaeffer entered his first employment as an engineer, briefly working in telecommunications in Strasbourg.     In 1935 he began a relationship with a woman named Elisabeth Schmitt, and later in the year married her and with her had his first child, Marie-Claire Schaeffer.  He and his new family then officially relocated to Paris where he joined the Radiodiffusion Française (now called Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française; French for "French Radio and Television Broadcasting") in 1936 and began his work in radio broadcasting and presentation.  It was there that he began to move away from his initial interests in telecommunications and to pursue music instead, combining his abilities as an engineer with his passion for sound. In his work at the station, Schaeffer experimented with records and an assortment of other devices—the sounds they made and the applications of those sounds—after convincing the radio station's management to allow him to use their equipment. This period of experimentation was significant for Schaeffer's development, bringing forward many fundamental questions he had on the limits of modern musical expression. In these experiments, Pierre tried playing sounds backwards, slowing them down, speeding them up and juxtaposing them with other sounds,  all techniques which were virtually unknown at that time.  He had begun working with new contemporaries whom he had met through RTF, and as such his experimentation deepened. Schaeffer's work gradually became more avant-garde, as he challenged traditional musical style with the use of various devices and practices. A unique variety of electronic instruments—ones which Schaeffer and his colleagues created, using their own engineering skills—came into play in his work, like the chromatic, sliding and universal phonogenes, Francois Bayle's Acousmonium and a host of other devices such as gramaphones and some of the earliest tape recorders.     "Musique concrète was an experimental technique that combined pre-recorded sounds ­ natural as well as musical ­ to make musical compositions. Using only the earliest tape recorders, sounds were edited, played backwards and speeded up and down to create fascinating ‘sound-scapes’. Pierre Henry was a prolific composer of musique concrète and collaborated with Schaeffer on many compositions. Luciano Berio and Steve Reich are also key figures in musique concrète composition. Karlheinz Stockhausen combined electronic and concrète sounds to become a leader of avant-garde music making." 
Beginnings of writing career
In 1938 Schaeffer began his career as a writer, penning various articles and essays for the Revue Musicale, a French journal of music. His first column, Basic Truths, provided a critical examination of musical aspects of the time.A known ardent Catholic, Schaeffer began to write minor religiously-based pieces, and in the same year as his Basic Truths he published his first novel: Chlothar Nicole — a short Christian novel.
Club d'essai & the origin of musique concrète
By that time in his life,  Schaeffer had co-founded La Jeune France, which had interests in theatre and the visual arts, as well as in music and certain aspects of mysticism. In 1942, he created the Studio d'Essai (later known as the Club d'Essai), which played a role in the activities of the French resistance during World War II, and later became a center of musical activity. It was from d'Essai that he successfully recorded his first work, which itself appeared on Dix ans d'essais radiophoniques du Studio au Club d'Essai: 1942–1952, a compilation of his personal concrète, along with many other artists' experimental pieces, released later in his life—1953.  The compilation has since become valued as a notable publication of the experimental music genre. With the rise of nuclear power after World War II, Pierre became a notable activist in the anti-nuclear movement, one of the main factors associated with his personal life other than his work in the field of music.
Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concrète
In 1949, Schaeffer met the percussionist-composer Pierre Henry, with whom he collaborated on many different musical compositions, and in 1951, he founded the Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concrète (GRMC) in the French Radio Institution. This gave him a new studio, which included a tape recorder. This was a significant development for Schaeffer, who previously had to work with phonographs and turntables to produce music. Schaeffer is generally acknowledged as being the first composer to make music using magnetic tape. His continued experimentation led him to publish À la Recherche d'une Musique Concrète (French for "In Search of a Concrete Music") in 1952, which was a summation of his working methods up to that point. His only opera, Orphée 53 ("Orpheus 53"), premiered in 1953.Schaeffer left the GRMC in 1953 and reformed the group in 1958 as the Groupe de Recherche Musicale[s] (GRM) (at first without "s", then with "s"), where he briefly mentored the young Jean Michel Jarre, among other students. His last "etude" (study) came in 1959: the "Study of Objects" (Etudes aux Objets).In 1954 Schaeffer founded traditional music label Ocora ("Office de Coopération Radiophonique") alongside composer, pianist and musicologist Charles Duvelle, with a worldwide coverage in order to preserve African rural soundscapes. Ocora also served as a facility to train technicians in African national broadcasting services. Today, it is still run by Duvelle.In 1988, Schaeffer appeared in a New York Times article on the 1988 Spitak earthquake. Schaeffer had led a 498-member rescue team in Leninakan to help find survivors in the aftermath of the quake.
Later life & death
Schaeffer became an associate professor at the Paris Conservatoire from 1968 to 1980 after creating a "class of fundamental music and application to the audiovisual."   He suffered from Alzheimer's disease later in his life, and died from the condition in Aix-en-Provence in 1995. He was 85 years old.Schaeffer was thereafter remembered by many of his colleagues with the title, "Musician of Sounds".
Legacy
Musique concrète   The term musique concrète (French for "real music", literally "concrete music"), which was coined by Schaeffer in 1948,  can be misunderstood as simply referring to music made from "real-world" audibles or other naturally occurring sounds that do not include an instrumental/human interface. While this aspect of musique concrète is a major factor according to how Schaeffer had developed it, it should predominantly be seen as a term describing more than simply the recording and manipulation of everyday noises. In a broader sense, the phrase embodies new sensibilities of musical expression and entails a reconceptualized framework for the long-established "organized" sound of the world, one that does not rely on familiar descriptors of rhythm and timbre, or tone and tempo. Schaeffer believed traditionally classical (or as he called it, "serious") music begins as an abstraction (musical notation) that is later produced as audible music. Musique concrète, by contrast, strives to start with the "concrete" sounds that emanate from base phenomena and then abstracts them into a composition. The term musique concrète is then, in essence, the breaking down of the structured production of traditional instruments, harmony, rhythm, and even music theory itself, in an attempt to reconstruct music from the bottom up.From the contemporary point of view, the importance of Schaeffer's musique concrète is threefold. He developed the concept of including any and all sounds into the vocabulary of music. At first he concentrated on working with sounds other than those produced by traditional musical instruments. Later on, he found it was possible to remove the familiarity of musical instrument sounds and abstract them further by techniques such as removing the attack of the recorded sound. He was among the first musicians to manipulate recorded sound for the purpose of using it in conjunction with other sounds in order to compose a musical piece. Techniques such as tape looping and tape splicing were used in his research, often comparing to sound collage. The advent of Schaeffer's manipulation of recorded sound became possible only with technologies that were developed after World War II had ended in Europe. His work is recognized today as an essential precursor to contemporary sampling practices. Schaeffer was among the first to use recording technology in a creative and specifically musical way, harnessing the power of electronic and experimental instruments in a manner similar to Luigi Russolo, whom he admired and from whose work he drew inspiration.Furthermore, he emphasized the importance of "playing" (in his terms, jeu) in the creation of music. Schaeffer's idea of jeu comes from the French verb jouer, which carries the same double meaning as the English verb play: 'to enjoy oneself by interacting with one's surroundings', as well as 'to operate a musical instrument'. This notion is at the core of the concept of musique concrète, and reflects on freely improvised sound, or perhaps more specifically electroacoustic improvisation, from the standpoint of Schaeffer's work and research.
Influences on music 
Pierre's aforementioned student in GRM, Jean Michel Jarre, went on to great international success in his own musical career. Jarre's 1997 album, Oxygene 7-13, is dedicated to Schaeffer. Pierre Henry also made a tribute to the man, composing his Écho d'Orphée, Pour P. Schaeffer alongside him for Schaeffer's last work and second compilation, L’Œuvre Musicale. His other notable pupils include Joanna Bruzdowicz, Bernard Parmegiani, Micheline Coulombe Saint-Marcoux, Armando Santiago, Elzbieta Sikora.
Research legacy 
The writers Martial Robert and Carlos Palombini have mentioned Schaeffer frequently in their works, and have penned a number of books on or referring to his life and legacy. Schaeffer being a writer himself, he coauthored several works with a number of his colleagues, such as Sophie Brunet, Marc Pierret and Michel Chion, among others. Today Schaeffer's work is still being published.
Many of Schaeffer's works have become rarities. As recently as 2006 a coauthored work of his, Sur les traces de Pierre Schaeffer, was published post-mortem.
OtherToday, in his honor, the Qwartz Electronic Music Awards has named several of its past events after Schaeffer. Pierre himself was a prize winner at the awards more than once.
Works
MusicAll of Schaeffer's musical compositions (concrète or otherwise) were recorded before the advent of the CD, either on cassettes or a more archaic form of magnetic tape (therefore the term "discography" cannot be appropriately used here; rather his music in general). Mass-production for his work was limited at best, and each piece was, by Schaeffer's terms, intended to be released foremost as an exposé to the masses of what he believed was a new and somewhat revolutionizing form of music. The original production of his marketed work was done by the "Groupe de Recherches Musicales" (a.k.a. GRM; now owned and operated by INA or the Institut National de l'Audiovisuel), the company which he initially had formed around his creations. Other music was broadcast live (Pierre himself being notable on French radio at the time) and/or done in live "concert". Some individual tracks even found their way into the use of other artists, with Pierre's work being fronted in mime performances and ballets. Now after his death, various musical production companies, such as Disques Adès and Phonurgia Nova have been given rights to distribute his work.Below is a list of Schaeffer's musical works, showing his compositions and the year(s) they were recorded.

Concertino-Diapason (1948; collaboration with J.J. Grünewald)
Cinq études de bruits (1948)
Suite pour 14 instruments (1949)
Variations sur une flûte mexicaine (1949)
Bidule en ut (1950; collaboration with Pierre Henry)
La course au kilocycle (1950; radio score, collaboration with Pierre Henry)
L'oiseau r.a.i. (1950)
Symphonie pour un homme seul (1950; collaboration with Pierre Henry; revised versions in 1953, 1955, and 1966 (Henry))
Toute la lyre (1951; pantomime, collaboration with Pierre Henry. Also known as Orphée 51)
Masquerage (1952; film score)
Les paroles dégelées (1952; music for a radio production)
Scènes de Don Juan (1952; incidental music, collaboration with Monique Rollin)
Orphée 53 (1953; opera)
Sahara d'aujourd'hui (1957; film score, collaboration with Pierre Henry)
Continuo (1958; collaboration with Luc Ferrari)
Etude aux sons animés (1958)
Etude aux allures (1958)
Exposition française à Londres (1958; collaboration with Luc Ferrari)
Etude aux objets (1959)
Nocturne aux chemins de fer (1959; incidental music)
Phèdre  (1959; incidental music)
Simultané camerounais (1959)
Phèdre (1961)
L'aura d'Olga (1962; music for a radio production, collaboration with Claude Arrieu)
Le trièdre fertile (1975; collaboration with Bernard Durr)
Bilude (1979)


Broadcasted narrativesApart from his published and publicized music, Schaeffer conducted several musical (and specifically musique concrète-related) presentations via French radio. Although these broadcasts contained musical pieces by Schaeffer they cannot be adequately described as part of his main line of musical output. This is because the radio "essays", as they were appropriately named, were mainly narration on Schaeffer's musical theories philosophies rather than compositions in and of themselves.Schaeffer's radio narratives include the following:

The Shell Filled With Planets (1944)
Cantata to Alsace (1945)
An Hour of the World (1947)
From Claudel to Brangues (1953)
Ten Years of Radio Essays by the Studio at Club Essay: 1942-1952 (1955)


Selected bibliography  Schaeffer's literary works span a range of genres, both in terms of fiction and non-fiction. He predominantly wrote treatises and essays, but also penned a film review and two plays. An ardent Catholic, Schaeffer wrote Chlothar Nicole (French: Clotaire Nicole; published 1938)—a Christian novel or short story—and Tobias (French: Tobie; published 1939) a religiously-based play.
Fiction
Novels and short stories

Chlothar Nicole (1938)
The Guardian of The Volcano (1969)
Prelude, Chorale and Fugue (1981)


Plays

Tobie (1939)
Secular Games (1946)


Non-fiction

America, We Ignore You (1946)
The Non-Visual Element of Films (1946)
In Search of a Concrete Music (1952)
Music and Acoustics (1967)


References 
Further reading

Dalibor Davidović, Nikša Gligo, Seadeta Midžić, Daniel Teruggi, and Jerica Ziherl (eds.) (2011). Proceedings of the International Conference Pierre Schaeffer: mediArt, with a foreword by Ivo Malec, papers by Daniel Teruggi, François Bayle, Jocelyne Tournet-Lammer, Dieter Kaufmann, Francisco Rivas, Seadeta Midžić, Marc Battier, Brian Willems, Leigh Landy, Cedric Maridet, Hans Peter Kuhn, Tatjana Böhme-Mehner, Jelena Novak, Martin Laliberté, Suk-Jun Kim, Darko Fritz, Stephen McCourt, Biljana Srećković, and Elzbieta Sikora. Rijeka: Muzej moderne i suvremene umjetnosti. ISBN 978-953-6501-78-6.
   
   
 


External links 
 

PierreSchaeffer.com — Official website
Le Groupe de Recherches Musicales at the Institut national de l'audiovisuel  
Club d'Essai — Unofficial website of Club d'Essai  
Les Machines à Communiquer — Unofficial website by French historian Elizabeth Antebiel  
Pierre Schaeffer at the online alumni community of the École Polytechnique  
Pierre Schaeffer at the Electronic Music Foundation
 
Pierre Schaeffer at Last.fm
Pierre Schaeffer at BBC Music
Pierre Schaeffer at Discogs
Pierre Schaeffer at Artistdirect

 
  
 
DEFAULTSORT



























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Juliette Binoche
 
 Juliette Binoche ( ; born 9 March 1964) is a French actress, artist and dancer. She has appeared in more than 40 feature films, been recipient of numerous international accolades, is a published author and has appeared on stage across the world. Coming from an artistic background, she began taking acting lessons during adolescence. After performing in several stage productions, she was propelled into the world of auteurs Jean-Luc Godard (Hail Mary, 1985), Jacques Doillon (Family Life, 1985) and André Téchiné, who made her a star in France with the leading role in his 1985 drama Rendez-vous. Her sensual performance in her English-language debut The Unbearable Lightness of Being (1988), directed by Philip Kaufman, launched her international career.She sparked the interest of Steven Spielberg, who offered her several parts including a role in Jurassic Park which she declined, choosing instead to join Krzysztof Kieślowski on the set of Three Colors: Blue (1993), a performance for which she won the Venice Film Festival Award for Best Actress and a César. Three years later Binoche gained further acclaim in Anthony Minghella's The English Patient (1996), for which she was awarded an Academy Award and a BAFTA for Best Supporting Actress in addition to the Best Actress Award at the 1997 Berlin Film Festival. For her performance in Lasse Hallström's romantic comedy Chocolat (2000) Binoche was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress.During the 2000s she maintained a successful, critically acclaimed career, alternating between French and English language roles in both mainstream and art-house productions. In 2010 she won the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival for her role in Abbas Kiarostami's Certified Copy making her the first actress to win the European "best actress triple crown".Throughout her career Binoche has intermittently appeared on stage, most notably in a 1998 London production of Luigi Pirandello's Naked and in a 2000 production of Harold Pinter's Betrayal on Broadway for which she was nominated for a Tony Award. In 2008 she began a world tour with a modern dance production in-i devised in collaboration with Akram Khan. Affectionately referred to as "La Binoche"  by the French press, her other notable performances include: Mauvais Sang (1986), Les Amants du Pont-Neuf (1991), Damage (1992), The Horseman on the Roof (1995), Code Unknown (2000), Caché (2005), Breaking and Entering (2006) and Flight of the Red Balloon (2007).
Early lifeBinoche was born in Paris, the daughter of Jean-Marie Binoche, a director, actor, and sculptor, and Monique Stalens, a teacher, director, and actress.  Her mother is of Polish descent. Her maternal Polish Catholic grandparents were imprisoned at Auschwitz because they were considered to be intellectuals by the Nazi occupiers.  She also has French, Flemish, Brazilian, and Moroccan ancestry.  When her parents divorced in 1968, four year old Binoche and her sister Marion were sent to a provincial boarding school. Inside the Actors Studio; Lipton, James; 27 October 2002; season 9, episode 2  During their teens, the Binoche sisters spent their school holidays with their maternal grandmother, not seeing either parent for months at a time. Binoche has stated that this perceived parental abandonment had a profound effect on her. She was not particularly academic L'Année Juliette; Première, September 1995; iss 222, p 83; (French language)  and in her teenage years she began acting at school in amateur stage productions. At 17, she directed and starred in a student production of the Eugène Ionesco play, Exit the King. She studied acting at the Conservatoire National Supérieur d'Art Dramatique (CNSAD), but quit after a short time as she disliked the curriculum.  In the early 1980s, she found an agent through a friend and joined a theater troupe with which she toured France, Belgium and Switzerland under the pseudonym "Juliette Adrienne".  Around this time she began lessons with the famed acting coach Vera Gregh. Her first professional screen experience was as an extra in the three part TF1 television series Dorothée, danseuse de corde (1983) directed by Jacques Fensten, which was followed by a similarly small role in the provincial television film Fort bloque directed by Pierrick Guinnard. Following this Binoche secured her first feature film appearance with a minor role in Pascal Kané's Liberty Belle (1983). Her role required just two days on set, but was enough to inspire Binoche to pursue a career in film. 
Career

1984–1991
Binoche's early films would see her established as a French star of some renown.  In 1983, she auditioned for the female lead in Jean-Luc Godard's' controversial Hail Mary, a modern retelling of the Virgin birth.  Godard requested a meeting with Binoche having seen a photo of her taken by her boyfriend of the time. Juliette Binoche: The First Act, Brody, Richard; The New Yorker, 10 March 2011; Retrieved 18 April 2011  She has said that she spent six months on the set of the film in Geneva, although her role in the final cut is contained to only a few scenes.   Further supporting roles followed in a variety of French films: Annick Lanoë's Les Nanas was to give Binoche her most noteworthy role to date, playing opposite established stars Marie-France Pisier and Macha Meril, in a mainstream comedy. Juliette Binoche. Die unnahbare Schöne; Blum, Katerina; Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, 1995; ISBN 3-453-08129-3; p 76; (German language)  However, she has stated that the experience was not particularly memorable or influential. L'Année Juliette; Première, September 1995; iss 222, p 84; (French language)  She gained more significant exposure in Jacques Doillon's critically acclaimed Family Life, which cast her as the volatile teenage step-daughter of Sami Frey's central character. This film was to set the tone of her early career.  Doillon has commented that in the original screenplay her character was written to be 14 years old, he was so impressed with Binoche's audition he changed the character's age to 17 to allow her take the role.  In April 1985, Binoche followed this with another supporting role in Bob Decout's Adieu Blaireau, a policier thriller starring Philippe Léotard and Annie Girardot. Adieu Blaireau failed to have much impact with critics or audiences. It was to be later in 1985 that Binoche would fully emerge as a leading actress with her role in André Téchiné's Rendez-vous. She was cast at short notice when Sandrine Bonnaire had to abandon the film due to a scheduling conflict.  Rendez-vous premiered at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival, winning Best Director. The film was a sensation and Binoche became the darling of the festival.  Rendez-Vous is the story of a provincial actress, Nina (Binoche), who arrives in Paris and embarks on a series of dysfunctional liaisons with several men, including the moody, suicidal Quentin (Lambert Wilson). However it is her collaboration with theatre director Scrutzler, played by Jean-Louis Trintignant, which comes to define Nina. L'Année Juliette; Première, September 1995; iss 222, p 88; (French language)  In a review of Rendez-Vous in Film Comment, Armond White described it as "Juliette Binoche's career defining performance".  In 1986, Binoche was nominated for her first César for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in the film.  Following Rendez-Vous, she was unsure of what role to take next. She auditioned unsuccessfully for Yves Boisset's Bleu comme l'enfer and Robin Davis's Hors la loi,  but was eventually cast in My Brother-in-law Killed My Sister (1986) by Jacques Rouffio opposite the popular French stars Michel Serrault and Michel Piccoli. This film was a critical and commercial failure.  Binoche has commented that Rouffio's film is very significant to her career as it taught her to judge roles based on the quality of the screenplay and her connection with a director, not on the reputation of other cast members.  Later in 1986, she again starred opposite Michel Piccoli in Leos Carax's Mauvais Sang. This film was a critical and commercial success, leading to Binoche's second César nomination. Mauvais Sang is an avant-garde thriller in which she plays Anna the vastly younger lover of Marc (Piccoli) who falls in love with Alex (Denis Lavant), a young thief.  Binoche has stated that she, "discovered the camera", while shooting this film. In August 1986, Binoche began filming Philip Kaufman's adaptation of Milan Kundera's The Unbearable Lightness of Being, portraying the young and innocent Tereza.  Released in 1988, this was Binoche's first English language role and was a worldwide success with critics and audiences alike  Set against the Russian invasion of Prague in 1968, the film tells the story of the relationships a Czech surgeon, Tomas (Daniel Day-Lewis), has with his wife Tereza and his lover Sabina (Lena Olin). Binoche has stated that at the time her English was very limited and that she relied on a French translation to fully grasp her role.  After this success, Binoche decided to return to France rather than pursue an international career. Juliette Binoche. Die unnahbare Schöne; Blum, Katerina; Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, 1995; ISBN 3-453-08129-3; p 89; (German language)  In 1988, she filmed the lead in Pierre Pradinas's Un tour de manège, a little-seen French film opposite François Cluzet.  She has stated that her attraction to this film was that it gave her the opportunity to work with close friends and family.  Pradinas is the husband of her sister Marion Stalens who was set photographer on the film and appeared in a cameo role.  In the summer of 1988, Binoche returned to the stage in an acclaimed production of Anton Checkov's The Seagull directed by Russian director Andrei Konchalovsky at Théâtre De L'odéon in Paris.  Later that year she began work on Léos Carax's Les Amants du Pont-Neuf.  The film was beset by problems and took three years to complete, requiring investment from three producers and funds from the French government. Cahiers du Cinema, Iss. 448, Oct. 1991  When finally released in 1991, Les Amants du Pont-Neuf was a critical success. Binoche won a European Film Award  as well as securing her third César nomination for her performance. In the film Binoche portrays an artist who lives rough on the famous Parisian bridge where she meets another young vagrant (Denis Lavant). This iconic part of the city becomes the backdrop for a wildly passionate love story and some of the most visually arresting images of the city ever created.  The paintings featured in the film were Binoche's own work.  She also designed the French poster for the film which features an ink drawing of the eponymous lovers locked in embrace.  During a break in filming in 1990, Binoche spent five days shooting Mara for Mike Figgis, based on Henry Miller's Quiet Days in Clichy. This 30 minute film was part of HBO's anthology series Women & Men 2.  The film became somewhat contentious when, according to Mike Figgis, HBO altered it once he had completed it.  The film premiered on HBO in the U.S. on 18 August 1991. At this point, Binoche seemed to be at a crossroads in her career. She was recognized as one of the most significant French actresses of her generation.  However, the long production of Les Amants du Pont-Neuf had forced her to turn down several significant roles in international productions including The Double Life of Véronique by Krzysztof Kieślowski, Cyrano de Bergerac by Jean-Paul Rappeneau, Night and Day by Chantal Akerman and Beyond the Aegean an aborted project with Elia Kazan.  Now Binoche chose to pursue an international career outside France. 
1992–2000
The 1990s saw Juliette Binoche inaugurated as a European leading lady in a series of international films that were critical and commercial successes winning Binoche much praise and numerous awards for her performances. Blum, Katerina, Juliette Binoche. die unnahbare Schöne, Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, 1995, ISBN 3-453-08129-3 p.119 to p.125  This period saw her persona develop from that of a young gamine to a more melancholic, tragic presence. Critics suggested that many of her roles were notable for her almost passive intensity in the face of tragedy and despair. Sight & Sound | June 2000. BFI (7 December 2010). Retrieved on 7 January 2011.  In fact Binoche has nicknamed her characters from this period as her "sorrowful sisters".  Following the long shoot of Les Amants du Pont-Neuf, Binoche relocated to London for the 1992 productions of Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights and Damage, both of which considerably enhanced her international reputation.  Yet, from a professional and personal point-of-view, both films were significant challenges for Binoche; her casting opposite Ralph Fiennes's Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights, in favour of English actresses Helena Bonham Carter  and Kate Beckinsale,  was immediately contentious and drew derision from the British press, unimpressed that a uniquely English role had gone to a French actress.  The film had its world premiere at the 1992 Edinburgh International Film Festival. Reviews were poor, with Binoche being cynically dubbed "Cathy Clouseau" and being derided for her "franglais" accent.  Both Binoche and director Peter Kosminsky distanced themselves from the film, with Binoche refusing to do any promotion for the film or to redub it into French. Quoted in feature article Première Magazine No 222, 09/1995  Damage, a UK and French co-production, is the story of a British conservative minister played by Jeremy Irons who embarks on a torrid affair with his son's fiancée (Binoche). Based on the novel by Josephine Hart and directed by veteran French director Louis Malle, Damage seemed to be the ideal international vehicle for Binoche; however the production was wrought with difficulties and dogged by rumours of serious conflict. In an on-set interview, Louis Malle stated that it was the "most difficult" film he had ever made, while Binoche commented that "the first day was one big argument".  Damage opened in the UK late in 1992 and debuted early in 1993 on US screens. Reviews were somewhat mixed.  For her performance, Juliette Binoche received her fourth César nomination.In 1993, she appeared in Krzysztof Kieślowski's Three Colors: Blue to much critical acclaim.  The first film in a trilogy inspired by the ideals of the French republic and the colors of its flag, Three Colors: Blue is the story of a young woman who loses her composer husband and daughter in a car accident. Though devastated she learns to cope by rejecting her previous life in favour of conscious "nothing"; rejecting all people, belongings and emotions.  Three Colors: Blue premiered at the 1993 Venice Film Festival, landing Binoche the Best Actress Prize. She also won a César, and a nomination for the Golden Globe. Binoche has said her inspirations for the role were her friend and coach Vernice Klier who suffered a similar tragedy, and the book The Black Veil by Anny Duperey which deals with the author's grief at losing her parents at a young age.  Binoche made cameo appearances in the other two films in Kieślowski's trilogy, Three Colors: White and Three Colors: Red. Around this time, Steven Spielberg offered her roles in Jurassic Park and Schindler's List. She turned down both parts.  After the success of Three Colors: Blue, Binoche took a short sabbatical during which she gave birth to her son Raphaël in September 1993. In 1995, Binoche returned to the screen in a big-budget adaptation of Jean Giono's The Horseman on the Roof directed by Jean-Paul Rappeneau. The film was particularly significant in France as it was the first French production to use digital special effects and was at the time the most expensive film in the history of French cinema.  The film was a box-office success around the world and Binoche was again nominated for a César for Best Actress. This role, as a romantic heroine, was to color the direction of many of her subsequent roles in the late 1990s.  In 1996, Binoche appeared in her first comedic role since My Brother-in-Law Killed My Sister a decade before; A Couch in New York was directed by Chantal Akerman and co-starred William Hurt. This screw-ball comedy tells the story of a New York psychiatrist who swaps homes with a Parisian dancer.  The film was a critical and commercial failure.  Three Colors: Blue, The Horseman on the Roof and A Couch in New York all gave Binoche the opportunity to work with prestigious directors she had turned down during the prolonged shoot of Les Amants du Pont-Neuf.  Her next role would significantly reinforce her position as a bona fide international movie star, The English Patient, based on the prize winning novel by Michael Ondaatje and directed by Anthony Minghella, was a worldwide hit.  Produced by Saul Zaentz, producer of The Unbearable Lightness of Being, the film reunited Juliette Binoche with Ralph Fiennes, Heathcliff to her Cathy four years previously. Binoche has said that the shoot on location in Tuscany and at the famed Cinecittà in Rome was among the happiest professional experiences of her career.  The film, which tells the story of a badly burned, mysterious man found in the wreckage of a plane during World War II, won nine Academy Awards, including Best Supporting Actress for Juliette Binoche.  With this film, she became the second French actress to win an Oscar, following Simone Signoret's win for Room at the Top in 1960. After this international hit, Binoche returned to France and began work opposite Daniel Auteuil on Claude Berri's Lucie Aubrac, the true story of a French Resistance heroine. Binoche was released from the film six weeks into the shoot due to differences with Berri regarding the authenticity of his script.  Binoche has described this event as being like "an earthquake" to her. 
Next Juliette Binoche was reunited with director André Téchiné for Alice et Martin (1998), the story of a relationship between an emotionally damaged Parisian musician and her younger lover who hides a dark family secret. The film failed to find an audience in France, although it was critically acclaimed in the UK.  In February 1998 Binoche made her London stage debut in a new version of Luigi Pirandello's Clothe the Naked  retitled Naked and adapted by Nicolas Wright. The production, directed by Jonathan Kent, was very favorably received.   Following this acclaimed performance, she returned to French screens with Children of the Century (1999), a big budget romantic epic, in which she played 19th-century French proto-feminist author George Sand. The film depicted Sand's affair with the poet and dandy Alfred de Musset played by Benoit Magimel. This lavish costume drama was filmed on location in Paris and Venice and featured couture costumes by the renowned fashion designer Christian Lacroix.  The following year saw Binoche in four contrasting roles, each of which enhanced her reputation. La Veuve de Saint-Pierre (2000) by Patrice Leconte, for which she was nominated for a César for Best Actress, was a period drama which saw Binoche appear opposite Daniel Auteuil in the role of a woman who attempts to save a condemned man from the guillotine.  The film won favourable reviews, particularly in the U.S.  where it was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Foreign Language Film. The film won the Audience Award at the 2000 Toronto Film Festival  Next she appeared in Michael Haneke's Code Unknown, a film which was made following Binoche's approach to the Austrian director.  The film premiered in competition at the 2000 Cannes Film Festival.  This critically acclaimed role was a welcome change from playing the romantic heroine in a series of costume dramas.  Later that year, Binoche made her Broadway debut in an adaptation of Harold Pinter's Betrayal for which she was nominated for a Tony Award. Staged by the Roundabout Theatre Company and directed by David Leveaux, the production also featured Liev Schreiber and John Slattery.  Back on screen, Binoche was the heroine of the Lasse Hallström film Chocolat from the best selling novel by Joanne Harris. For her role Binoche won a European Film Audience Award for Best Actress and was nominated for an Academy Award and a BAFTA.  Chocolat is the story of a mysterious stranger who opens a chocolaterie in a conservative French village in 1959. The film was a worldwide hit. Between 1995 and 2000, Binoche was the advertising face of the Lancôme perfume Poème, her image adorning print campaigns photographed by Richard Avedon  and a television advertising campaign,  including an advert directed by Anthony Minghella and scored by Gabriel Yared. By the end of this period and following roles in a number of prestige productions, critics were wondering if Binoche was typecast as the tragic, despairing muse. In a feature article entitled "The Erotic Face" in the June 2000 edition of British film criticism magazine Sight and Sound, Ginette Vincendeau pondered Binoche's persona; Vincendeau suggested that the fixation of numerous directors upon her face had led to an erasure of her body, and to her being perceived only as a romantic icon rather than a versatile actress. 
2001–2006
Following the success of Chocolat, the early 2000s saw Juliette Binoche internationally recognized as an A-list movie star.  However, her persona seemed to be somewhat fixed following a series of period roles where she played the always stoic heroine facing tragedy and desolation.  Ever keen to try something new, Binoche returned to French cinema in 2002 in an unlikely role; Jet Lag opposite Jean Reno saw Binoche play a ditzy beautician.  The film, directed by Daniele Thompson, was a box-office hit in France and saw Binoche once again nominated for a César for Best Actress.  The film tells the story of a couple who meet at an airport during a strike. Initially the pair despises each other, but, over the course of one night, they find common ground and maybe even love. This playful spirit continued when Binoche featured in a 2003 Italian television commercial for the chocolates Ferrero Rocher. The advertisement played upon her Chocolat persona featuring Binoche handing out the chocolates to people on the streets of Paris. In a more serious vein, Binoche travelled to South Africa to make John Boorman's In My Country (2004) opposite Samuel L. Jackson. Based on the book Country of My Skull by Antjie Krog, the film examines The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) hearings following the abolition of Apartheid in the mid 1990s.  Although the film premiered at the 2004 Berlin Film Festival, it received much criticism for the inclusion of a fictional romantic liaison and for its depiction of black South Africans.  Despite the negative reception, Binoche was extremely enthusiastic about the film and her connection with Boorman.   Her sister, Marion Stalens, also travelled to South Africa to shoot a documentary, La reconciliation?, which explores the TRC process and follows Binoche's progress as she acts in Boorman's film.    Next, Binoche re-teamed with Michael Haneke for Caché. The film was an immediate success, winning best director for Haneke at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival,  while Binoche was nominated for a European Film Award for Best Actress for her role.  The film tells the story of a bourgeois Parisian couple, played by Binoche and Daniel Auteuil, who begin to receive anonymous videotapes containing footage shot over long periods, surveying the outside of their home. Caché went on to feature in the number one position on the "Top 10 of the 2000s" list published by The Times at the end of the decade.  Binoche's next film, Bee Season, based on the celebrated novel by Myla Goldberg, cast her opposite Richard Gere. The film was not a success at the box office taking less than $5 million worldwide.  For many critics the film, although intelligent, was "distant and diffuse".  Bee Season depicts the emotional disintegration of a family just as their daughter begins to win national spelling bees. Mary (2005) featured Binoche in a somewhat unlikely collaboration with the controversial American director Abel Ferrara for an investigation of modern faith and Mary Magdalene's position within the Catholic Church.  Featuring Forest Whittaker, Matthew Modine and Marion Cotillard, Mary was an immediate success, winning the Grand Prix at the 2005 Venice Film Festival. Despite these accolades and favorable reviews, particularly from the influential cultural magazine Les Inrockuptibles,  Mary failed to secure a distributor in key markets such as the U.S. and the U.K. The Cannes Film Festival in 2006 saw Binoche feature in the anthology film Paris, je t'aime appearing in a section directed by the Japanese director Nobuhiro Suwa. Suwa's Place des Victoires is the story of a grief-stricken mother who manages to have a final brief moment with her dead son. The segment also features Willem Dafoe and Hippolyte Girardot. Paris, je t'aime was a popular success, taking over $17 million, at the world box-office.  In September 2006, Binoche appeared at the Venice Film Festival to launch A Few Days in September, written and directed by Santiago Amigorena. Despite an impressive cast including John Turturro, Nick Nolte and up-coming French star Sara Forestier, the film was a failure. A Few Days in September is a thriller set between 5 and 11 September 2001, in which Binoche plays a French secret service agent, who may, or may not, have information relating to impending attacks on the U.S.  The film was the recipient of harsh criticism from the press for its perceived trivialization of the events of 11 September 2001.  While promoting the film in the U.K., Binoche told an interviewer she believed the CIA and other government agencies must have had foreknowledge of the 11 September attacks, as depicted in the film.  Next Binoche traveled to the 2006 Toronto Film Festival for the premiere of Breaking and Entering, her second film with Anthony Minghella in the director's chair, based on his first original screenplay since his break-through film Truly, Madly, Deeply (1991). In Breaking and Entering, Binoche played a Bosnian refugee living in London, while Jude Law co-starred as a well-to-do businessman drawn into her life via an act of deception. In preparation for her role, Binoche travelled to Sarajevo where she met women who had survived the war of the 1990s.  Lushly photographed by Benoît Delhomme, Breaking and Entering portrays intersecting lives amongst the flux of urban renewal in inner-city London.  Despite the fact that Binoche was praised for her performance, the film did not ring true for critics and failed to find an audience.  In a review in Variety, Todd McCarthy writes that, "Binoche, physically unchanged as ever, plays Amira's controlled anguish with skill".  Breaking and Entering also featured Robin Wright, Vera Farmiga, Juliet Stevenson, Rafi Gavron and Martin Freeman.Although Binoche began the decade on a professional high with an Academy Award nomination for Chocolat, she struggled at the beginning of the 2000s to secure roles that did not confine her to the tragic, melancholic persona developed in the 1990s.    Despite the huge success of Caché, other high profile films such as In My Country, Bee Season and Breaking and Entering failed critically  and commercially,  Binoche seemed to be at a crossroads in her career. 
2007–present2007 was the start of a particularly busy period for Juliette Binoche, one that would see her take on diverse roles in a series of critically acclaimed international movies giving her film career a new impetus, as she shed the restrictions that seemed to have stifled her career in the early part of the decade.  The Cannes Film Festival saw the premiere of Flight of the Red Balloon (2007) by the widely acclaimed Taiwanese director Hou Hsiao-Hsien. It was originally conceived as a short film to form part of a 20th anniversary tribute to the Musée D'Orsay, to be produced by Serge Lemoine president of the museum. When that idea failed to find sufficient funding, Hou developed it into a feature length film and secured the necessary financing.  The film was well received by international critics and went on to debut around the world early in 2008. Paying homage to Albert Lamorisse's 1957 short The Red Balloon, Hou's film tells the story of a woman's efforts to juggle her responsibilities as a single mother with her commitment to her career as a voice artist. Shot on location in Paris, the film was entirely improvised by the cast.  The film was number one on the influential critic J. Hoberman's "Top 10 List" for 2008 published in The Village Voice. Disengagement by Amos Gitai premiered out-of-competition at the 2007 Venice Film Festival. Co-starring Liron Levo and Jeanne Moreau, Disengagement is a political drama charting the story of a French woman, of Dutch/Palestinian origin, who goes in search of a daughter she abandoned 20 years previously on the Gaza strip. She arrives in Gaza during the 2005 Israeli disengagement.  The film won the prestigious Premio Roberto Rossellini  and was critically acclaimed, particularly by the eminent Cahiers du Cinema.  However the film proved more controversial in Israel where state television station Channel 1 withdrew financial support for the film citing the "left-wing nature of Gitai's films". In stark contrast, Peter Hedges co-wrote and directed the Disney produced Dan in Real Life, a romantic comedy featuring Binoche alongside Steve Carell. It was released in October 2007, becoming a popular commercial success in the US, before debuting around the world in 2008. The film grossed over $65 million at the worldwide box-office.  Dan in Real Life is the story of a widowed man (Carell) who meets, and instantly falls for, a woman (Binoche), only to discover she is the new girlfriend of his brother. The film also features Dane Cook, Emily Blunt and Diane Weist Back in France, Binoche was seen to popular and critical success in Paris directed by Cédric Klapisch. Paris is Klapisch's personal ode to the French capital and features an impressive ensemble of French talent, including Romain Duris, Fabrice Luchini and Mélanie Laurent. Paris was one of the most successful French films internationally in recent years, having grossed over $22 million at the world box office.  Binoche and Klapisch had originally met on the set of Mauvais Sang in 1986, where Klapisch was working as a set electrician. Also in France, Summer Hours (2008), directed by Olivier Assayas, is the critically acclaimed story of three siblings who struggle with the responsibility of disposing of their late mother's valuable art collection. The film premiered in France in March 2008 and had its U.S. debut at the 2008 New York Film Festival, before going on general release in the U.S. on 19 May 2009. Widely acclaimed, the film was nominated for the Prix Louis Delluc in France and appeared on numerous U.S. "Top 10 lists", including first place on David Edelstein's "Top 10 of 2009" list in New York Magazine, and J.R. Jones's list in the Chicago Reader.  Summer Hours also features Charles Berling, Jérémie Renier and Édith Scob.In the autumn of 2008, Binoche starred in a theatrical dance production titled in-i, co-created with renowned choreographer Akram Khan. The show, a love story told through dance and dialogue, featured stage design by Anish Kapoor and music by Philip Sheppard. It premiered at the National Theatre in London before embarking on a world tour.  Writing in The Australian, John McCallum wrote that, "Binoche has radiant presence as an actor, her dancing is relaxed and naturalistic",   while The Sunday Times in the UK commented that, "Binoche's physical achievement is incredible: Khan is a master mover". The production was part of a 'Binoche Season' titled Ju'Bi'lations, also featuring a retrospective of her film work and an exhibition of her paintings, which were also published in a bilingual book Portraits in Eyes.  The book featured ink portraits of Binoche as each of her characters and of each director she had worked with up to that time. She also penned a few lines to each director. In April 2006 and again in December 2007, Binoche travelled to Tehran at the invitation of Abbas Kiarostami.  While there in 2007, she shot a cameo appearance in his film Shirin (2008) which he was shooting at the time. Binoche's visit proved controversial when two Iranian MPs raised the matter in parliament, advising more caution be exercised in granting visas to foreign celebrities which might lead to "cultural destruction".  In June 2009 Binoche began work on Certified Copy directed by Kiarostami.  The film was an Official Selection in competition at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival.      Binoche won the Best Actress Award at the festival for her performance. The film went on general release in France on 19 May 2010 to very positive reviews.  Her win at the 2010 Cannes Film festival makes Binoche the first actress to win the European "best actress triple crown": Best Actress at Venice for Three Colors: Blue, Best Actress at Berlin for The English Patient and Best Actress at Cannes for Certified Copy. The September 2010 UK release of the film was overshadowed when French actor Gérard Depardieu made disparaging comments about Binoche to the Austrian magazine Profil, "Please can you explain to me what the mystery of Juliette Binoche is meant to be?" he said. "I would really like to know why she has been so esteemed for so many years. She has nothing – absolutely nothing".  In response, while promoting Certified Copy, Binoche spoke to movie magazine Empire saying, "I don't know him. I understand you don't have to like everyone and you can dislike someone's work. But I don't understand the violence [of his statements]... I do not understand why he is behaving like this. It is his problem."  Certified Copy proved to be controversial in Kiarostami's homeland when Iranian authorities announced on 27 May 2010 that the film was to be banned in Iran, apparently due to Binoche's attire; Deputy Culture Minister Javad Shamaqdari is quoted as saying, "If Juliette Binoche were better clad it could have been screened but due to her attire there will not be a general screening." 
 Following the success of Certified Copy, Binoche appeared in a brief supporting role in The Son of No One for American writer and director Dito Montiel. The film also stars Channing Tatum, Al Pacino and Ray Liotta. The Son of No One premiered at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival to fairly negative reaction.  It was acquired by Anchor Bay Entertainment for distribution in the US and other key territories arriving in selected US cinemas on 4 November 2011.  As of December 2011, according to film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, The Son of No One is Juliette Binoche's least critically successful film, with only 18% of critics giving it a positive review.  In June 2010, Binoche started work on Elles for Polish director Malgorzata Szumowska. Elles, produced under the working title Sponsoring,   is an examination of teenage prostitution with Juliette Binoche playing a journalist for ELLE. The film was released in France on 1 February 2012.  On 12 January 2011, Variety announced that Juliette Binoche would star in The Life of Another loosely based on the novel by Frédérique Deghelt.  The film is the directorial debut of the French actress Sylvie Testud and co-stars actor/director Mathieu Kassovitz. In the film, a young woman falls in love, then wakes up 15 years later, the mother of a young boy and on the verge of a divorce. The film began shooting on 4 April 2011 and was released on French screens on 15 February 2012. On 17 February 2011, Screendaily announced that Binoche had been cast in David Cronenberg's film Cosmopolis with Robert Pattinson, Paul Giamatti, Mathieu Amalric, and Samantha Morton.  The film, produced by Paulo Branco, began principal photography on 24 May 2011 and was released in 2012.  In October 2011, Binoche began work on A Cœur Ouvert opposite Edgar Ramirez and directed by Marion Laine. Based on the novel by Mathias Énard, the film is the story of the obsessive relationship between two wildly successful surgeons. When addiction and an unexpected pregnancy almost destroys their relationship, they embark on a cathartic journey to the Orinoco.  In 2012 Juliette Binoche is slated to take the lead in Bruno Dumont's La Créatrice, a drama which recounts three days during the thirty years French artist Camille Claudel spent in a mental asylum despite the fact that she had not been diagnosed with any malady. The film will examine Claudel's fight to maintain her sanity and find creative inspiration. Following this, Binoche will shoot A Stormy Summer Night based on the classic French novel Dix heures et demie du soir en été by Marguerite Duras. The film is to be directed by first time helmer Fabrice Camoin for release in early 2013. 

"I don't look back on the past because I like to live in the present. I know this makes some people think I probably never cared, but I need my freedom and I like to keep moving." - Juliette Binoche   


Personal lifeBinoche has two children: a son Raphaël (born on 2 September 1993), whose father is André Halle, a professional scuba diver, and a daughter Hana (born on 16 December 1999), whose father is actor Benoît Magimel, with whom Binoche starred in the 1999 film Children of the Century. Her sister, Marion Stalens, born 1960, is a professional photographer with Corbis, as well as a director of documentary films, including; La réconciliation?, a documentary shot on the set of John Boorman's film In My Country,  The Actress and the Dancer, exploring the genesis of Binoche's dance show in-i  and Juliette Binoche - Sketches for a Portrait a documentary which follows Binoche as she paints the portraits that would later appear in her book Portraits in Eyes.  Her half brother Camille Humeau (born 1978) is an acclaimed musician and has been part of the line-up of Oncle Strongle,   before top-lining the group Artichaut Orkestra.    In 2007, he appeared in a stage production of Cabaret directed by Sam Mendes.  Stage director Pierre Pradinas is married to her sister Marion. 
Charitable workSince 1992, Binoche is a patron of the French Cambodian charity Enfants d'Asie (previously ASPECA). Through this charity she is godmother to five Cambodian orphans, and has funded the construction of a children's home in Battambang.  Starting in 2000, Juliette Binoche has been involved with the organization Reporters Without Borders. In 2002, she presided over "Photos of Stars" with Thierry Ardisson. Nearly 100 French stars were given disposable cameras, which were then auctioned, the buyer then having the exclusive photos taken by the star developed. 
Political views and activismIn April 2002, Binoche and several other French stars including Catherine Deneuve and Mathieu Kassovitz attended a "protest picnic" to object to the firing of Canal+ chairman Pierre Lescure by the Vivendi Universal company. On 7 February 2006, Binoche attented a high profile demonstration organised by Reporters Without Borders in support of Jill Carroll and two Iraqi journalists who had been abducted in Baghdad. She supported José Bové in the 2007 French presidential elections which were won by Nicolas Sarkozy.  She has disclosed on a number of occasions that she does not approve of the Sarkozy administration, stating that the president is creating a monarchic republic.   Binoche and numerous other French personalities including Isabelle Adjani, Yvan Attal, Jane Birkin and Josiane Balasko joined Réseau Education Sans Frontieres (RESF) on 7 January 2010 with a symbolic "cake of solidarity" to highlight the taxation and legitimacy issues being faced by undocumented workers in France. Binoche was a signatory to a June 2010 petition organized by Reporters Without Borders and Shirin Ebadi to protest against the detention of numerous people, including members of the press, who were protesting the occasion of the first anniversary of disputed re-election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. At the 2010 Cannes Film Festival Binoche spoke out against the detention of Iranian director Jafar Panahi, incarcerated in Teheran's Evin Prison since 1 March 2010 without charge or conviction. At the press conference following the press screening of Copie Conforme, Binoche was informed that Panahi had begun a hunger strike. Binoche’s appeal “very influential” in Iranian director's release | The Observers. Observers.france24.com (25 May 2010). Retrieved on 7 January 2011.  The following day Binoche attended a press conference called especially to demand the release of Panahi. Also in attendance were Abbas Kiarostami, Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Gilles Jacob. Binoche read a letter which pointed out that Panahi's detention was "unwarranted and intolerable". When Binoche was awarded the Best Actress award at the festival, brandishing his name on a placard, she used her speech as an opportunity to raise Panahi's plight once again.  On 25 May it was announced that Panahi had been released on bail. It was generally agreed that the publicity Binoche and Kiarostami elicited for his case was a strong factor in his release.  On 20 December 2010 Panahi, after being prosecuted for "assembly and colluding with the intention to commit crimes against the country's national security and propaganda against the Islamic Republic," was handed a six-year jail sentence and a 20-year ban on making or directing any movies, writing screenplays, giving any form of interview with Iranian or foreign media as well as leaving the country. Binoche continues to lobby on his behalf. 
Filmography and awards

List of acting performances in film and television
Year Title Role Notes 
1983 Dorothée, danseuse de corde minor role Television film Also known as Dorothy the Rope Dancer 
1983 Liberty belle Girl at the rally  
1985   A friend of Veronique Also known as A Better Life 
1985 Rendez-vous Nina/Anne Larrieux Nominated - César Award for Best Actress 
1985 Adieu Blaireau Brigitte Also known as Farewell to Fred 
1985 Family Life Natacha Also known as La Vie de famille 
1985   Antoinette Also known as The Girls 
1985 Hail Mary Juliette Also known as Je Vous salue, Marie 
1985 Fort bloqué Nicole Television film 
1986 Mauvais Sang Anna Nominated - César Award for Best Actress Also known as Bad Blood and The Night is Young 
1986 My Brother-in-law Killed My Sister Esther Bouloire Also known as Mon Beau-frère a tué ma soeur 
1988   Tereza  
1989   Elsa Also known as Once Around the Park 
1991   Michèle Stalens Also known as The Lovers on the Bridge European Film Award for Best Actress Nominated - César Award for Best Actress 
1991 Women & Men 2 Mara Television film Segment "Henry Miller's Mara" 
1992 Damage Anna Barton Nominated - César Award for Best Actress 
1992 Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights Cathy Linton / Catherine Earnshaw  
1993 Three Colors: Blue Julie Vignon (de Courcy) César Award for Best Actress Venice Film Festival for Best Actress Nominated - Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Motion Picture Drama Also known as Trois couleurs bleu 
1995   Pauline de Théus Nominated – César Award for Best Actress. Also known as Le Hussard sur le toit 
1996   Hana Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role Chlotrudis Award for Best Supporting Actress Silver Bear for Best Actress Nominated - Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Nominated - Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role 
1996   Beatrice Saulnier Also known as Un Divan à New York 
1998 Alice et Martin Alice Also known as Alice and Martin 
1999 Children of the Century George Sand/Baroness Aurore Dudevant Also known as Les Enfants du siècle 
2000 Chocolat Vianne Rocher European Film Award for Best Actress Nominated - Academy Award for Best Actress Nominated - BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role Nominated - Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role Nominated - Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Nominated - Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy 
2000 Code Unknown Anne Laurent Also known as Code inconnu 
2000   Pauline (Madame La) Nominated - César Award for Best Actress Also known as La Veuve de Saint-Pierre 
2002 Jet Lag Rose Nominated - César Award for Best Actress Also known as Décalage horaire 
2004 In My Country Anna Malan Also known as Country of My Skull 
2005 Mary Marie Palesi / Mary Magdalene  
2005 Bee Season Miriam  
2005 Caché Anne Laurent Nominated - European Film Award for Best Actress Also known as Hidden 
2006 Breaking and Entering Amira  
2006   Irène Montano Also known as Quelques jours en septembre 
2006 Paris, je t'aime Suzanne Segment "Place des Victoires" 
2007 Dan in Real Life Marie  
2007 Disengagement Ana  
2007 Flight of the Red Balloon Suzanne Also known as Le Voyage du ballon Rouge 
2008 Paris Elise  
2008 Summer Hours Adrienne Also known as L'Heure d'été 
2008 Shirin Woman in audience  
2010 Certified Copy Elle Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress Also known as Copie Conforme 
2011 The Son of No One Lauren  
2011 Elles Anne Also known as Sponsoring 
2012 Cosmopolis Didi Fancher  
2012 The Life of Another Marie Post Production  Also known as La Vie d'une autre 
2012 An Open Heart Mila Production  Also known as Un Singe sur l'Epaule 
2012 La Créatrice Camille Claudel Pre Production 
2013 A Stormy Summer Night Maria Pre Production  Also known as Orage d'Une Nuit d'Été 

Other awards

Won

1986 – Prix Romy Schneider
1992 – European Film Award – Best Actress – Les Amants du Pont-Neuf
1993 – Berlin International Film Festival – Berlinale Camera   
1993 – Venice Film Festival – Best Actress – Three Colors: Blue
1996 – National Board of Review – Best Supporting Actress – The English Patient
1997 – Berlin International Film Festival – Best Actress – The English Patient   
1997 – European Film Award – Best Actress – The English Patient
1997 – Screen Actors Guild Award – Best Supporting Actress – The English Patient
2010 – Cannes Film Festival – Best Actress – Certified Copy
2010 – Kerry Film Festival – Maureen O'Hara Award 
2010 – Cairo International Film Festival – Lifetime achievement 


Nominations

2001 – Screen Actors Guild Award – Best Actress – Chocolat
2001 – Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role – Chocolat
2001 – Screen Actors Guild Award – Outstanding Cast – Chocolat
2005 – European Film Award Best Actress; – Caché
2005 – London Critics Circle Film Awards – Best Actress – Caché
2006 – British Independent Film Award – Best Actress – Breaking & Entering


References 
External links 
 

 
 
 
Juliette Binoche at filmsdefrance.com
Juliette Binoche Interview at AMCtv.com
  
 
DEFAULTSORT










 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	André Breton
 
 
André Breton ( ; 19 February 1896 – 28 September 1966) was a French writer and poet. He is known best as the founder of Surrealism. His writings include the first Surrealist Manifesto (Manifeste du surréalisme) of 1924, in which he defined surrealism as "pure psychic automatism".
BiographyBorn to a family of modest means in Tinchebray (Orne) in Normandy, he studied medicine and psychiatry. During World War I he worked in a neurological ward in Nantes, where he met the devotee of Alfred Jarry, Jacques Vaché, whose anti-social attitude and disdain for established artistic tradition influenced Breton considerably. Vaché committed suicide at age 24, and his war-time letters to Breton and others were published in a volume entitled Lettres de guerre (1919), for which Breton wrote four introductory essays.Breton married his first wife, Simone Kahn, on 15 September 1921. The couple relocated to rue Fontaine # 42 in Paris on 1 January 1922. The apartment on rue Fontaine became home to Breton's collection of more than 5,300 items: modern paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs, books, art catalogs, journals, manuscripts, and works of popular and Oceanic art.
From Dada to SurrealismIn 1919 Breton initiated the review Littérature with Louis Aragon and Philippe Soupault. He also associated with Dadaist Tristan Tzara. In 1924 he was instrumental in the founding of the Bureau of Surrealist Research.In a publication The Magnetic Fields (Les Champs Magnétiques), a collaboration with Soupault, he implemented the principle of automatic writing. He published the Surrealist Manifesto in 1924, and was editor of the magazine La Révolution surréaliste from 1924. A group of writers became associated with him: Philippe Soupault, Louis Aragon, Paul Éluard, René Crevel, Michel Leiris, Benjamin Péret, Antonin Artaud, and Robert Desnos.Anxious to combine the themes of personal transformation found in the works of Arthur Rimbaud with the politics of Karl Marx, Breton joined the French Communist Party in 1927, from which he was expelled in 1933. During this time, he survived mostly by the sale of paintings from his art gallery.In 1935, there was a conflict between Breton and Ilya Ehrenburg during the first "International Congress of Writers for the Defense of Culture" which opened in Paris in June. Breton had been insulted by Ehrenburg—along with all fellow surrealists—in a pamphlet which said, among other things, that surrealists were "pederasts". Breton slapped Ehrenburg several times on the street, which resulted in surrealists being expelled from the Congress. Crevel, who according to Salvador Dalí, was "the only serious communist among surrealists"     was isolated from Breton and other surrealists, who were unhappy with Crevel because of his homosexuality and annoyed with communists in general.In 1938, Breton accepted a cultural commission from the French government to travel to Mexico. After a conference at the National Autonomous University of Mexico about surrealism, Breton stated after getting lost in Mexico City (as no one was waiting for him at the airport) "I don't know why I came here. Mexico is the most surrealist country in the world".However, visiting Mexico provided the opportunity to meet Leon Trotsky. Breton and other surrealists traveled via a long boat ride from Patzcuaro to the town of Erongaricuaro. Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo were among the visitors to the hidden community of intellectuals and artists. Together, Breton and Trotsky wrote a manifesto Pour un art révolutionnaire indépendent (published under the names of Breton and Diego Rivera) calling for "complete freedom of art", which was becoming increasingly difficult with the world situation of the time.
In 1939,  Breton collaborated with artist Wifredo Lam on the publication of Breton's poem "Fata Morgana", which was illustrated by Lam.
1940sBreton was again in the medical corps of the French Army at the start of World War II. The Vichy government banned his writings as "the very negation of the national revolution" Franklin Rosemont André Breton and the First Principles of Surrealism, 1978, ISBN 0-904383-89-X.  and Breton escaped, with the help of the American Varian Fry and Harry Bingham, to the United States and the Caribbean during 1941. Breton got to know Martinican writer Aimé Césaire, and later composed the introduction to the 1947 edition of Césaire's Cahier d'un retour au pays natal. During his exile in New York City he met Elisa, the Chilean woman who would become his third wife.In 1944, he and Elisa traveled to the Gaspé Peninsula in Québec, Canada, where he wrote Arcane 17, a book which expresses his fears of World War II, describes the marvels of the Rocher Percé and the extreme northeastern part of North America, and celebrates his new romance with Elisa.
Later life
Breton returned to Paris in 1946, where he opposed French colonialism (for example as a signatory of the Manifesto of the 121 against the Algerian war) and continued, until his death, to foster a second group of surrealists in the form of expositions or reviews (La Brèche, 1961–1965). In 1959, he organized an exhibit in Paris. By the end of World War II André Breton decided to embrace anarchism explicitly. In 1952 Breton wrote "It was in the black mirror of anarchism that surrealism first recognised itself."     "Breton was consistent in his support for the francophone Anarchist Federation and he continued to offer his solidarity after the Platformists around Fontenis transformed the FA into the Federation Communiste Libertaire. He was one of the few intellectuals who continued to offer his support to the FCL during the Algerian war when the FCL suffered severe repression and was forced underground. He sheltered Fontenis whilst he was in hiding. He refused to take sides on the splits in the French anarchist movement and both he and Peret expressed solidarity as well with the new FA set up by the synthesist anarchists and worked in the Antifascist Committees of the 60s alongside the FA." André Breton died in 1966 at 70 and was buried in the Cimetière des Batignolles in Paris.
Breton as a collectorBreton was an avid collector of art, ethnographic material, and unusual trinkets. He was particularly interested in materials from the northwest coast of North America. During a financial crisis he experienced in 1931, most of his collection (along with his friend Paul Éluard's) was auctioned. He subsequently rebuilt the collection in his studio and home at rue Fontaine 42. The collection grew to over 5,300 items: modern paintings, drawings, sculptures, photographs, books, art catalogs, journals, manuscripts, and works of popular and Oceanic art.  After Breton's death on 28 September 1966, Breton's third wife, Elisa, and his daughter, Aube, allowed students and researchers access to Breton's archive and collection. After thirty-six years, when attempts to establish a surrealist foundation to protect the collection were opposed, the collection was auctioned by Calmels Cohen at Drouot-Richelieu.   A wall of the apartment is preserved at the Centre Georges Pompidou.  Nine previously unpublished manuscripts, including the Manifeste du surréalisme, were auctioned by Sotheby's in May 2008.   
Breton's collection

Selected modern painters or sculptors: Pierre Alechinsky, Aloïse Corbaz, Braulio Arenas, Arman, Jean Arp, Enrico Baj, Ben, A Benquet, Alexandre Boileau, Bona Pieyre de Mandiargue, Micheline Bounoure, André Bourdil, Francis Bouvet, Victor Brauner, Elisa Breton, Jorge Caceres, Jacques Callot, Jorge Camacho, Paul Colinet, Pierre Courthion, Fleury-Joseph Crépin, Salvador Dalí, André Demonchy, Ferdinand Desnos, Deyema, Óscar Domínguez, Enrico Donati, Mirabelle Dors, Marcel Duchamp, Baudet Dulary, René Duvilliers, Yves Elléouët, Nusch Eluard, Paul Éluard, Colette Enard, Jimmy Ernst, Max Ernst, Henri Espinoza, Fahr el Nissa Zeid, Jean Fautrier, Luis Fernandez, Charles Filiger, Alexandre Evariste, Johann Henrich Füssli, Paul Gauguin, Alberto Gironella, Arshile Gorky, Max Walter Svanberg, Eugenio Granell, Henri de Groux, Jacques Hérold, René Iché, Wifredo Lam,  René Magritte, Joan Miró, Pablo Picasso, Man Ray, Diego Rivera, Yves Tanguy, Adolf Wölfli, etc.



Selected photographers:  Manuel Alvarez Bravo, Pierre Argillet, Bach Fritz, Jacques-André Boiffard, Brassaï, Elisa Breton, Claude Cahun, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Léo Dohmen, Paul Dacceti, Izis, Dora Maar, Man Ray, Raoul Ubac, Emile van Moerkerken, etc.



kachina dolls


Marriages
Breton married three times: 

His first wife, from 1921 to 1931, was Simone Collinet, née Simone Kahn (1897–1980).
His second wife was Jacqueline Lamba, with whom he had his only child, a daughter named Aube.
His third wife was Elisa Claro.


WorksHis works include the case studies Nadja (1928) and L'Amour fou [Mad Love] (1937).Selected works:

Mont de piété, 1919
S'il Vous Plaît, 1920 – If You Please
Les Champs magnétiques, 1920 – The Magnetic Fields
Manifeste du surréalisme, 1924 – The Surrealist Manifesto
Les Pas perdus (Breton), 1924 – The Lost Steps
Poisson soluble, 1924 – Soluble Fish
Un Cadavre, 1924 – A Corpse
Légitime Défense, 1926 – Legitimate Defense
Le Surréalisme et la peinture, 1926 – Surrealism and Painting
Nadja, 1928 – Nadja
L'Immaculée Conception, 1930 – The Immaculate Conception
Deuxième Manifeste du surréalisme, 1930 – The Second Manifesto of Surrealism
Ralentir travaux, 1930 – Slow Down Works
L'Union libre, 1931
La Revolver à cheveux blancs, 1932 – The Revolver Has White Hair
Les Vases communicants, 1932 – The Communicating Vessels
Le Message automatique; 1933 – The Automatic Message
Qu'est-ce que le surréalisme, 1934 – What Is Surrealism
L'Air de l'eau, 1934 – Looks Like Water
Point du Jour, 1934 – Break of Day
Position politique du surréalisme, 1935 – The Political Position of Surrealism
Notes sur la poésie, 1936 (with Paul Éluard) – Notes on Poetry
L'Amour fou, 1937 – Mad Love
Point du jour, 1937
Dictionnaire abrégé du surréalisme, 1938 (with Paul Éluard) – Abridged Dictionary of Surrealism
Manifesto for an Independent Revolutionary Art, 1938 (with Leon Trotsky)
Fata Morgana, 1940 
Anthologie de l'humour noir, 1940 – Anthology of Black Humor
Arcane 17, 1945 – Arcane 17
Jeunes Cerisiers garantis contre les lièvres, 1946 – Young Cherry Trees Secured against Hares
Ode à Charles Fourier, 1947 – Ode to Charles Fourier
Yves Tanguy, 1947
Poèmes 1919–48, 1948
La Lampe dans l'horloge, 1948 – The Lamp in the Clock
Martinique, charmeuse de serpents, 1948
Entretiens, 1952 – Discussions
La Clé des champs, 1953 – The Key of the Fields
Farouche à quatre feuilles, 1954 (with Lise Deharme, Julien Gracq, Jean Tardieu) – Wild to Four Leaves
Les Manifestes du surréalisme, 1955 – Manifestoes of Surrealism
L'Art magique, 1957 – The Magic Art
Constellations, 1958
Le la, 1961
Le Surréalisme et la Peinture, 1965
Pas-de-preuve(non-lieu), 1966
Selected Poems, 1969
Perspective cavalière, 1970
What is Surrealism? Selected Poems, 1978
Poems of André Breton, 1982


See also 

Anti-art
Hector Hyppolite


References 

André Breton: Surrealism and Painting – edited and with an introduction by Mark Polizzotti.
Manifestoes of Surrealism by André Breton, translated by Richard Seaver and Helen R. Lane. ISBN 0-472-06182-8


External links 
 
 

The Manifesto of Surrealism (1924)
André Breton's Nadja

  
DEFAULTSORT














 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Barbara McClintock
 
 
 
 Barbara McClintock (June 16, 1902 – September 2, 1992), the 1983 Nobel Laureate in Physiology or Medicine, was an American scientist and one of the world's most distinguished cytogeneticists. McClintock received her PhD in botany from Cornell University in 1927, where she was a leader in the development of maize cytogenetics. The field remained the focus of her research for the rest of her career. From the late 1920s, McClintock studied chromosomes and how they change during reproduction in maize. Her work was groundbreaking: she developed the technique for visualizing maize chromosomes and used microscopic analysis to demonstrate many fundamental genetic ideas, including genetic recombination by crossing-over during meiosis—a mechanism by which chromosomes exchange information. She produced the first genetic map for maize, linking regions of the chromosome with physical traits, and demonstrated the role of the telomere and centromere, regions of the chromosome that are important in the conservation of genetic information. She was recognized amongst the best in the field, awarded prestigious fellowships, and elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1944.During the 1940s and 1950s, McClintock discovered transposition and used it to show how genes are responsible for turning physical characteristics on or off. She developed theories to explain the repression or expression of genetic information from one generation of maize plants to the next. Encountering skepticism of her research and its implications, she stopped publishing her data in 1953. McClintock based her views upon her research rather than upon prejudice.  Later, she made an extensive study of the cytogenetics and ethnobotany of maize races from South America. McClintock's research became well understood in the 1960s and 1970s, as researchers demonstrated the mechanisms of genetic change and genetic regulation that she had demonstrated in her maize research in the 1940s and 1950s . Awards and recognition for her contributions to the field followed, including the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, awarded to her in 1983 for the discovery of genetic transposition; she is the only woman to receive an unshared Nobel Prize in that category. 
Early lifeBarbara McClintock was born in Hartford, Connecticut, the third of four children of physician Thomas Henry McClintock and Sara Handy McClintock. She was independent from a very young age, a trait McClintock described as her "capacity to be alone". From about the age of three until the time she started school, McClintock lived with an aunt and uncle in Brooklyn, New York in order to reduce the financial burden on her parents while her father established his medical practice. She was described as a solitary and independent child, and a tomboy. She was close to her father, but had a difficult relationship with her mother. Keller, Evelyn Fox. (1983) A feeling for the organism.  W. H. Freeman and Company, New York. ISBN 0-7167-1433-7 McClintock completed her secondary education at Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn.  She discovered science at high school, and wanted to attend Cornell University to continue her studies. Her mother resisted the idea of higher education for her daughters, believing it would make them unmarriageable. The family also had financial problems. Barbara was almost prevented from starting college, but her father intervened, and she entered Cornell in 1919.
Education and research at CornellMcClintock began her studies at Cornell's College of Agriculture in 1919. She studied botany, receiving a BSc in 1923. Her interest in genetics had been sparked when she took her first course in that field in 1921. The course was based on a similar one offered at Harvard University, and was taught by C. B. Hutchison, a plant breeder and geneticist.  Hutchison was impressed by McClintock's interest, and telephoned to invite her to participate in the graduate genetics course at Cornell in 1922. McClintock pointed to Hutchison's invitation as the reason she continued in genetics: "Obviously, this telephone call cast the die for my future. I remained with genetics thereafter."  Although it has been reported that women could not major in genetics at Cornell, and therefore her MA and PhD— earned in 1925 and 1927, respectively—were officially awarded in botany, recent research has revealed that women did earn graduate degrees in Cornell's Plant Breeding Department during the time that McClintock was a student at Cornell. During her graduate studies and postgraduate appointment as a botany instructor, McClintock was instrumental in assembling a group that studied the new field of cytogenetics in maize. This group brought together plant breeders and cytologists, and included, Charles R. Burnham, Marcus Rhoades, George Beadle (who became a Nobel laureate in 1958 for showing that genes control metabolism), and Harriet Creighton.  Rollins Adams Emerson, head of the Plant Breeding Department, supported these efforts, although he was not a cytologist himself.  McClintock's cytogenetic research focused on developing ways to visualize and characterize maize chromosomes. This particular part of her work influenced a generation of students, as it was included in most textbooks. She also developed a technique using carmine staining to visualize maize chromosomes, and showed for the first time the morphology of the 10 maize chromosomes.  By studying the morphology of the chromosomes, McClintock was able to link, to a specific chromosome, groups of traits that were inherited together. Marcus Rhoades noted that McClintock's 1929 Genetics paper on the characterization of triploid maize chromosomes triggered scientific interest in maize cytogenetics, and attributed to his female colleague 10 of the 17 significant advances in the field that were made by Cornell scientists between 1929 and 1935. In 1930, McClintock was the first person to describe the cross-shaped interaction of homologous chromosomes during meiosis. During 1931, McClintock and a graduate student, Harriet Creighton, proved the link between chromosomal crossover during meiosis and the recombination of genetic traits.  They observed how the recombination of chromosomes and the resulting phenotype formed the inheritance of a new trait.  Until this point, it had only been hypothesized that genetic recombination could occur during meiosis, although it had been shown genetically. McClintock published the first genetic map for maize in 1931, showing the order of three genes on maize chromosome 9.   This information provided necessary data for the crossing over study she published with Creighton.  In 1938, she produced a cytogenetic analysis of the centromere, describing the organization and function of the centromere.McClintock's breakthrough publications, and support from her colleagues, led to her being awarded several postdoctoral fellowships from the National Research Council. This funding allowed her to continue to study genetics at Cornell, the University of Missouri, and the California Institute of Technology, where she worked with E. G. Anderson.  During the summers of 1931 and 1932, she worked at Missouri with geneticist Lewis Stadler, who introduced her to the use of X-rays as a mutagen.  (Exposure to X-rays can increase the rate of mutation above the natural background level, making it a powerful research tool for genetics.) Through her work with X-ray-mutagenized maize, she identified ring chromosomes, which form when the ends of a single chromosome fuse together after radiation damage. From this evidence, McClintock hypothesized that there must be a structure on the chromosome tip that would normally ensure stability. She showed that the loss of ring-chromosomes at meiosis caused variegation in maize foliage in generations subsequent to irradiation resulting from chromosomal deletion. During this period, she demonstrated the presence of what she called the nucleolar organizers on a region on maize chromosome 6, which is required for the assembly of the nucleolus. McClintock received a fellowship from the Guggenheim Foundation that made possible six months of training in Germany during 1933 and 1934. She had planned to work with Curt Stern, who had demonstrated crossing-over in Drosophila just weeks after McClintock and Creighton had done so; however, in the meantime, Stern emigrated to the United States. Instead,  she worked in Germany with geneticist Richard B. Goldschmidt. She left Germany early, amid mounting political tension in Europe, and returned to Cornell, remaining there until 1936, when she accepted an Assistant Professorship offered to her by Lewis Stadler in the Department of Botany at the University of Missouri–Columbia. 
University of MissouriDuring her time at Missouri, McClintock expanded her research on the effect of X-rays on maize cytogenetics. McClintock observed the breakage and fusion of chromosomes in irradiated maize cells. She was also able to show that, in some plants, spontaneous chromosome breakage occurred in the cells of the endosperm. Over the course of mitosis, she observed that the ends of broken chromatids were rejoined after the chromosome replication. In the anaphase of mitosis, the broken chromosomes formed a chromatid bridge, which was broken when the chromatids moved towards the cell poles. The broken ends were rejoined in the interphase of the next mitosis, and the cycle was repeated, causing massive mutation, which she could detect as variegation in the endosperm.  This cycle of breakage, fusion, and bridge, also described as the breakage–rejoining–bridge cycle, was a key cytogenetic discovery for several reasons.   First it showed that the rejoining of chromosomes was not a random event, and secondly it demonstrated a source of large-scale mutation. For this reason, it remains an area of interest in cancer research today.Although her research was progressing at Missouri, McClintock was not satisfied with her position at the University. She recalled being excluded from faculty meetings, and was not made aware of positions available at other institutions.  In 1940 she wrote to Charles Burnham, "I have decided that I must look for another job. As far as I can make out, there is nothing more for me here. I am an assistant professor at $3,000 and I feel sure that that is the limit for me."   Initially, McClintock's position had been especially created for her by Stadler and may have depended on his presence. Kass, Lee B. 2003.  "Records and recollections: A new look at Barbara McClintock, Nobel Prize-Winning geneticist".  Genetics 164 (August): 1251-1260.  Kass, Lee B. 2005. "Missouri compromise: tenure or freedom.  New evidence clarifies why Barbara McClintock left Academe".  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter 79: 52-71.  McClintock believed she would not gain tenure at Missouri, although according to some accounts she knew she would be offered a promotion by Missouri in the spring of 1942.  Recent evidence reveals that McClintock more likely decided to leave Missouri because she had lost trust in her employer and in the University administration.  In early 1941 she was invited by the Director of the Department of Genetics at Cold Spring Harbor to spend her summer there. She took a leave of absence from Missouri in hopes of finding a position elsewhere. She also accepted a visiting Professorship at Columbia University, where her former Cornell colleague Marcus Rhoades was a professor. He offered to share his research field at Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island.  In December 1941 she was offered a research position by Milislav Demerec, the newly appointed acting director, and she joined the staff of the Carnegie Institution of Washington's Department of Genetics Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.
Cold Spring HarborAfter her year-long temporary appointment, McClintock accepted a full-time research position at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. Here, she was highly productive and continued her work with the breakage-fusion-bridge cycle, using it to substitute for X-rays as a tool for mapping new genes. In 1944, in recognition of her prominence in the field of genetics during this period, McClintock was elected to the National Academy of Sciences—only the third woman to be elected. In 1945, she became the first woman president of the Genetics Society of America. In 1944 she undertook a cytogenetic analysis of Neurospora crassa at the suggestion of George Beadle, who had used the fungus to demonstrate the one gene–one enzyme relationship. He invited her to Stanford to undertake the study. She successfully described the number of chromosomes, or karyotype, of N. crassa and described the entire life cycle of the species. N. crassa has since become a model species for classical genetic analysis. 
Discovery of controlling elements 
In the summer of 1944 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, McClintock began systematic studies on the mechanisms of the mosaic color patterns of maize seed and the unstable inheritance of this mosaicism. She identified two new dominant and interacting genetic loci that she named Dissociator (Ds) and Activator (Ac). She found that the Dissociator did not just dissociate or cause the chromosome to break, it also had a variety of effects on neighboring genes when the Activator was also present. In early 1948, she made the surprising discovery that both Dissociator and Activator could transpose, or change position, on the chromosome.She observed the effects of the transposition of Ac and Ds by the changing patterns of coloration in maize kernels over generations of controlled crosses, and described the relationship between the two loci through intricate microscopic analysis. She concluded that Ac controls the transposition of the Ds from chromosome 9, and that the movement of Ds is accompanied by the breakage of the chromosome. When Ds moves, the aleurone-color gene is released from the suppressing effect of the Ds and transformed into the active form, which initiates the pigment synthesis in cells. The transposition of Ds in different cells is random, it may move in some but not others, which causes color mosaicism. The size of the colored spot on the seed is determined by stage of the seed development during dissociation. McClintock also found that the transposition of Ds and the is determined by the number of Ac copies in the cell.Between 1948 and 1950, she developed a theory by which these mobile elements regulated the genes by inhibiting or modulating their action. She referred to Dissociator and Activator as "controlling units"—later, as "controlling elements"—to distinguish them from genes. She hypothesized that gene regulation could explain how complex multicellular organisms made of cells with identical genomes have cells of different function. McClintock's discovery challenged the concept of the genome as a static set of instructions passed between generations. In 1950, she reported her work on Ac/Ds and her ideas about gene regulation in a paper entitled "The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize" published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. In summer 1951, when she reported on her work on gene mutability in maize at the annual symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, the paper she presented was called "The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize". Her work on controlling elements and gene regulation was conceptually difficult and was not immediately understood or accepted by her contemporaries; she described the reception of her research as "puzzlement, even hostility".  Nevertheless, McClintock continued to develop her ideas on controlling elements. She published a paper in Genetics in 1953 where she presented all her statistical data, and undertook lecture tours to universities throughout the 1950s to speak about her work.  She continued to investigate the problem and identified a new element that she called Suppressor-mutator (Spm), which, although similar to Ac/Ds, displays more complex behavior. Based on the reactions of other scientists to her work, McClintock felt she risked alienating the scientific mainstream, and from 1953 stopped publishing accounts of her research on controlling elements. Comfort, Nathaniel, C.(1999) ""The real point is control": The reception of Barbara McClintock's controlling elements". Journal of the History of Biology 32:133–6. 
The origins of maizeIn 1957, McClintock received funding from the National Science Foundation, and the Rockefeller Foundation sponsored her to start research on maize in South America, an area that is rich in varieties of this species . She was interested in studying the  evolution of maize, and being in South America would allow her to work on a larger scale. McClintock explored the chromosomal, morphological, and evolutionary characteristics of various races of maize. From 1962, she supervised four scientists working on South American maize at the North Carolina State University in Raleigh. Two of these Rockefeller fellows, Almiro Blumenschein and T. Angel Kato, continued their research on South American races of maize well into the 1970s. In 1981, Blumenschein, Kato, and McClintock published Chromosome constitution of races of maize, which is considered a landmark study of maize that has contributed significantly to the fields of evolutionary botany, ethnobotany, and paleobotany. 
Rediscovery of McClintock's controlling elementsMcClintock officially retired from her position at the Carnegie Institution in 1967, and was made a Distinguished Service Member of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. This honor allowed her to continue working with graduate students and colleagues in the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory as scientist emerita. In reference to her decision 20 years earlier no longer to publish detailed accounts of her work on controlling elements, she wrote in 1973:  Over the years I have found that it is difficult if not impossible to bring to consciousness of another person the nature of his tacit assumptions when, by some special experiences, I have been made aware of them. This became painfully evident to me in my attempts during the 1950s to convince geneticists that the action of genes had to be and was controlled. It is now equally painful to recognize the fixity of assumptions that many persons hold on the nature of controlling elements in maize and the manners of their operation. One must await the right time for conceptual change.  The importance of McClintock's contributions only came to light in the 1960s, when the work of French geneticists Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod described the genetic regulation of the lac operon, a concept she had demonstrated with Ac/Ds in 1951. Following Jacob and Monod's 1961 Journal of Molecular Biology paper "Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins", McClintock wrote an article for American Naturalist comparing the lac operon and her work on controlling elements in maize.  McClintock's contribution to biology is still not widely acknowledged as amounting to the discovery of genetic regulation. McClintock was widely credited for discovering transposition following the discovery of the process in bacteria and yeast in the late 1960s and early 1970s. During this period, molecular biology had developed significant new technology, and scientists were able to show the molecular basis for transposition. In the 1970s, Ac and Ds were cloned by other scientists and were shown to be Class II transposons. Ac is a complete transposon that can produce a functional transposase, which is required for the element to move within the genome. Ds has a mutation in its transposase gene, which means that it cannot move without another source of transposase. Thus, as McClintock observed, Ds cannot move in the absence of Ac. Spm has also been characterized as a transposon. Subsequent research has shown that transposons typically do not move unless the cell is placed under stress, such as by irradiation or the breakage, fusion, and bridge cycle, and thus their activation during stress can serve as a source of genetic variation for evolution. McClintock understood the role of transposons in evolution and genome change well before other researchers grasped the concept. Nowadays, Ac/Ds is used as a tool in plant biology to generate mutant plants used for the characterization of gene function. 
Honors and recognitionMcClintock was awarded the National Medal of Science by Richard Nixon in 1970.  Cold Spring Harbor named a building in her honor in 1973. In 1981, she became the first recipient of the MacArthur Foundation Grant, and was awarded the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, the Wolf Prize in Medicine and the Thomas Hunt Morgan Medal by the Genetics Society of America. In 1982, she was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University for her research in the "evolution of genetic information and the control of its expression."   Most notably, she received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1983, credited by the Nobel Foundation for discovering "mobile genetic elements",  over thirty years after she initially described the phenomenon of controlling elements. She was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society in 1989.    McClintock received the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences of the American Philosophical Society in 1993.   She was awarded 14 Honorary Doctor of Science degrees and an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters. In 1986 she was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame. During her final years, McClintock led a more public life, especially after Evelyn Fox Keller's 1983 book A feeling for the organism brought McClintock's story to the public. She remained a regular presence in the Cold Spring Harbor community, and gave talks on mobile genetic elements and the history of genetics research for the benefit of junior scientists. An anthology of her 43 publications The discovery and characterization of transposable elements: the collected papers of Barbara McClintock was published in 1987. McClintock died in Huntington, New York, on September 2, 1992 at the age of 90; she never married or had children.
LegacySince her death, McClintock has been the subject of the biographical work by science historian Nathaniel C. Comfort, in The tangled field : Barbara McClintock's search for the patterns of genetic control. Comfort's biography contests some claims about McClintock, described as the "McClintock Myth", which he claims was perpetuated by the earlier biography by Keller. Keller's thesis was that McClintock was long ignored because she was a woman working in the sciences. (McClintock was also sometimes met with derision because she was a woman working in the sciences. For example, when McClintock claimed that the genetics of maize was non-Mendelian, Sewall Wright said she "simply didn't understand the mathematics (a weakness in mathematics he felt was common of most women).".  In addition, geneticist Lotte Auerbach recounted that Joshua Lederberg returned from a visit to McClintock's lab with the remark: 'By God, that woman is either crazy or a genius.' "As Auerbach tells it, McClintock had thrown Lederberg and his colleagues out after half an hour 'because of their arrogance. She was intolerant of arrogance....She felt she had crossed a desert alone and no one had followed her.'"  However, Comfort asserts that McClintock was well regarded by her professional peers, even in the early years of her career.  Although Comfort argues that McClintock was not a victim of gender discrimination, she has been widely written about in the context of women's studies, and most recent biographical works on women in science feature accounts of her experience. She is held up as a role model for girls in such works of children's literature as Edith Hope Fine's Barbara McClintock, Nobel Prize geneticist, Deborah Heiligman's Barbara McClintock: alone in her field and Mary Kittredge's Barbara McClintock. A recent biography for young adults by Naomi Pasachoff, Barbara McClintock, Genius of Genetics, provides a new perspective, based on the current literature. On May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service issued the "American Scientists" commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations.  The scientists depicted were Barbara McClintock, John von Neumann, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman. McClintock was also featured in a 1989 four-stamp issue from Sweden which illustrated the work of eight Nobel Prize-winning geneticists. A small building at Cornell University and a laboratory building at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory bear her name to this day. A street has been named after her in the new "Adlershof Development Society" science park in Berlin The 2011 novel The Marriage Plot, by Jeffrey Eugenides, features a character named Diane Macgregor, whose career, research and Nobel Prize award all reflect McClintock's.
Key publications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
McClintock, Barbara., Kato, T. A. & Blumenschein, A. (1981) Chromosome constitution of races of maize. Its significance in the interpretation of relationships between races and varieties in the Americas.. Colegio de Postgraduados, Chapingo, Mexico


See also

List of female Nobel laureates


References 
Further reading 

Coe, Ed and Lee B. Kass. 2005. "Proof of physical exchange of genes on the chromosomes".  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 102 (No. 19, May): 6641-6656.    PMID 15867161
Comfort, Nathaniel C. (1999) ""The real point is control": The reception of Barbara McClintock's controlling elements". Journal of the History of Biology 32:133–62. PMID 11623812
Comfort, Nathaniel C. (2001) The tangled field: Barbara McClintock's search for the patterns of genetic control. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. ISBN 0-674-00456-6
Kass, Lee B. 2003.  "Records and recollections: A new look at Barbara McClintock, Nobel Prize-Winning geneticist".  Genetics 164 (August): 1251-1260.
Kass, Lee B.  2005.  "Harriet Creighton: Proud botanist".  Plant Science Bulletin.  51(4): 118-125.  Available online, December 2005: Botanical Society of America
Kass, Lee B. 2005. "Missouri compromise: tenure or freedom.  New evidence clarifies why Barbara McClintock left Academe".  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter 79: 52-71; article without footnotes or photographs; available, online April 2005: Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter
Kass, Lee B. and Christophe Bonneuil.  2004.  "Mapping and seeing: Barbara McClintock and the linking of genetics and cytology in maize genetics, 1928-1935".  Chapt 5, pp. 91–118, in Hans-Jörg Rheinberger and Jean-Paul Gaudilliere (eds.), Classical Genetic Research and its Legacy:  The Mapping Cultures of 20th Century Genetics.  London: Routledge.
Keller, Evelyn Fox (1983) A feeling for the organism.  W. H. Freeman and Company, New York ISBN 0-7167-1433-7
Bogdanov, Yu. F. (2002) A life devoted to science. In "Commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the birth of Barbara McClintock". Russian Journal of Genetics 38:984–87. PMID 12430570
Fedoroff, Nina V. (1995). Barbara McClintock. Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Science. 68:211–36.
Fedoroff, Nina V. 2002. "The well mangled McClintock myth". Trends in Genetics 18 (7): 378-379.
Kass, L. B. 1999.  "Current list of Barbara McClintock's publications". Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter 73: 42-48.  Available online, 1998: Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter
Kass, Lee B. 2000. "McClintock, Barbara, American botanical geneticist, 1902-1992".  pp. 66–69, in Plant Sciences. edited by R. Robinson.  Macmillan Science Library, USA.
Kass, L. B.  2002.  "The Tangled Field, by N. Comfort".  Isis.  93 (4): 729-730.
Kass, L. B., 2004.  Identification of photographs for the Barbara McClintock papers on the National Library of Medicine website.  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter 78: 24-26, available online, 2003: Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter
Kass Lee, B. 2007.  Harriet B. Creighton (1909–2004), on Women Pioneers in Plant Biology, American Society of Plant Biologists website, edited by Ann Hirsch. Published online, February 2007: American Society of Plant Biologists
Kass Lee, B. 2007.  Barbara McClintock (1902–1992), on Women Pioneers in Plant Biology, American Society of Plant Biologists website, Ann Hirsch editor. Published online, March 2007: American Society of Plant Biologists
Kass, L. B. and R. P. Murphy.  2003.  "Will the real Maize Genetics Garden please stand up?"  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter.  77: 41-43. Available online, 2003:  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter
Kass, L. B and W. B. Provine. 1999 (&1998).  Formerly restricted interview with Barbara McClintock, now available at Cornell University Archives.  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter. 73: 41. Available online, 1998: Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter
Kass, Lee B. Chris Bonneuil, and Ed Coe. 2005. "Cornfests, cornfabs and cooperation: The origins and beginnings of the Maize Genetics Cooperation News Letter". Genetics 169 (April): 1787-1797. Available online, May 6, 2005: Genetics Society of America
Murphy, R.P. and L.B. Kass.  2007.  Evolution of Plant Breeding at Cornell University: A Centennial History, 1907-2006.  Department of Plant Breeding & Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, pp. 1–98, Appendices A1-A98, Photo Section P1-P38. (July 2007).
Kass, Lee B. 2007b. Barbara McClintock (1902–1992), on Women Pioneers in Plant Biology, American Society of Plant Biologists website, Ann Hirsch editor. Published online, March 2007:   Lee B. 2007a. Harriet B. Creighton (1909–2004), on Women Pioneers in Plant Biology, American Society of Plant Biologists website, Ann Hirsch editor. Published online, February 2007:   Lee B. and E. Cobb.  2007. Landmarks and milestones in American plant biology, the Cornell connection.  Plant Science Bulletin 53(3, fall): 90-101). Available online, September 2007:   L. B. 2009. Barbara McClintock’s contributions to Biological Abstracts: Another Cornell connection.  Maize Genetics Cooperation Newsletter 83: 20-21.   [issued November 1, 2009]
Kass, L. B. and Chomet, P. 2009.  Barbara McClintock, Pgs.  17-52, in J. Bennetzen and S. Hake, Editors, Handbook of Maize: Genetics and Genomics. Springer.
Jones, R.N. 2005. "McClintock's controlling elements: the full story". Cytogenetics Research 109:90–103 PMID 15753564
Lamberts, William J. (2000) "McClintock, Barbara". American National Biography Online. Oxford University Press
McClintock, Barbara. (1987). The discovery and characterization of transposable elements: the collected papers of Barbara *McClintock, ed John A. Moore. Garland Publishing, Inc., ISBN 0-8240-1391-3.
Fedoroff, Nina V and Botstein, David (1993) The Dynamic Genome: Barbara McClintock's Ideas in the Century of Genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York. ISBN 0-87969-396-7
 
Archives and research collections

The Barbara McClintock Papers - Profiles in Science, National Library of Medicine.
Barbara McClintock Papers, 1927-1991 at the American Philosophical Society


External links 

The Official Site of Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Archives, Barbara McClintock:A Brief Biographical Sketch
Enhancer and Gene Trap Transposon Mutagenesis in Arabidopsis, comprehensive article on the use of Ac/Ds and other transposons for plant mutagenesis
Biography and Bibliographic Resources, from the Office of Scientific and Technical Information, United States Department of Energy
 
 
 
 
   
 
DEFAULTSORT






















 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Tim Brooke-Taylor
 
 Timothy Julian Brooke-Taylor OBE (born 17 July 1940) is an English comic actor. He became active in performing in comedy sketches while at Cambridge University, and became President of the Footlights club, touring internationally with the Footlights revue in 1964. Becoming wider known to the public for his work on BBC Radio with I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again, he moved into television with At Last the 1948 Show working together with old Cambridge friends John Cleese and Graham Chapman. He is most well known as one member of the Goodies, starring in the TV series throughout the 1970s and picking up international recognition in Australia and New Zealand. He has also appeared as an actor in various sitcoms, and has been a panellist on I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue for nearly 40 years.
Early life and educationBrooke-Taylor was born in Buxton, Derbyshire, England, the grandson of Francis Pawson, a parson who played centre forward for England's football team in the 1880s.  His mother was an international lacrosse player and his father a solicitor. He was expelled from primary school at the early age of five and a half. Brooke-Taylor was then schooled at Thorn Leigh Pre-Preparatory School, Holm Leigh Preparatory School (where he won a cup for his prowess as a bowler in the school cricket team) and Winchester College which he left with seven O-levels and two A-levels in English and History. After teaching for a year at a preparatory school in Berkhamsted and a term back at Holm Leigh School as a teacher,  he studied at Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge. There he read Economics and Politics before changing to read Law, and mixed with other budding comedians, including John Cleese, Graham Chapman, Bill Oddie and Jonathan Lynn in the prestigious Cambridge University Footlights Club (of which Brooke-Taylor became President in 1963). From Fringe to Flying Circus – 'Celebrating a Unique Generation of Comedy 1960–1980' – Roger Wilmut, Eyre Methuen Ltd, 1980.  Footlights! – 'A Hundred Years of Cambridge Comedy' – Robert Hewison, Methuen London Ltd, 1983. The Footlights Club revue, A Clump of Plinths was so successful during its Edinburgh Festival Fringe run, that the show was renamed as Cambridge Circus and the revue transferred to the West End in London, and then later taken to both New Zealand and to Broadway in the United States in September 1964.    He was also active in the Pembroke College drama society, the Pembroke Players.
CareerBrooke-Taylor moved swiftly into BBC Radio with the fast-paced comedy show I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again in which he performed and co-wrote.  As the screeching eccentric Lady Constance de Coverlet, he could be relied upon to generate the loudest audience response of many programmes in this long-running series merely with her unlikely catchphrase "did somebody call?" uttered after a comic and transparent feed-line, as their adventure story reached its climax or cliffhanger ending.  Other members of I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again were John Cleese, Bill Oddie, Graeme Garden, David Hatch and Jo Kendall. In the mid-'60s, Brooke-Taylor performed in the TV series On the Braden Beat with Canadian Bernard Braden, taking over the slot then-recently vacated by Peter Cook in his guise as E.L. Wisty. Brooke-Taylor played a reactionary right-wing city gent who believed he was the soul of tolerance.In 1967, Brooke-Taylor became a writer/performer on the television comedy series At Last the 1948 Show, with John Cleese, Graham Chapman and Marty Feldman.  The famous "Four Yorkshiremen" sketch was co-written by the four writers/performers of the series.    The sketch was one of the few sketches which survived the destruction of the series (by the tapes being wiped), by David Frost's Paradine Productions (which produced the series), and the sketch appears on the DVD of At Last the 1948 Show. The "Four Yorkshiremen" sketch has also been performed during Amnesty concert performances (by members of Monty Python – occasionally including other comedians and actors in place of Monty Python regulars – notably Rowan Atkinson and Alan Rickman), as well as being performed during Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl and on other Monty Python shows. Footage of Tim Brooke-Taylor and John Cleese, from At Last the 1948 Show, was shown on the documentary special Monty Python: Almost the Truth (The Lawyers Cut).Brooke-Taylor also took part in Frost's pilot programme How to Irritate People in 1968, designed to sell what would later be recognised as the Monty Python style of comedy to the American market. Many of the sketches were later revived in the Monty Python TV series, notably the job interview sketch where Brooke-Taylor played a nervous interviewee tormented by interviewer John Cleese. The programme was also notable as the first collaboration of John Cleese and Michael Palin.In 1968–69, Brooke-Taylor was also a cast member and writer on the television comedy series Marty starring Marty Feldman, with John Junkin and Roland MacLeod.   A compilation of the two series of Marty has been released on a BBC DVD with the title of The Best of Marty Feldman. During this period Brooke-Taylor appeared as two characters in the film One Man Band directed by Orson Welles, however the project was never completed and remains unreleased.At around the same time, Brooke-Taylor made two series of Broaden Your Mind with Graeme Garden (and Bill Oddie joining the series for the second season).  Describing itself as "An Encyclopedia of the Air", this series was a string of comedy sketches (often lifted from I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again), linked (loosely) by a weekly running theme. Unfortunately, nothing but a few minutes of film inserts exist for this programme, though home-made off-air audio recordings survive for both seasons. Its success led to the commissioning of The Goodies, also with Bill Oddie and Graeme Garden. First transmitted on BBC2 in November 1970, The Goodies was a huge television success, running for over a decade on both BBC TV and (in its final year) UK commercial channel London Weekend Television, spawning many spin-off books and successful records.During the run of the Goodies, Brooke-Taylor took part in the BBC radio series Hello, Cheeky!, a bawdy stand up comedy show also starring Barry Cryer and John Junkin. The series transferred to television briefly, produced by the UK commercial franchise Yorkshire Television. He also appeared on television in British sitcoms, including You Must Be the Husband with Diane Keen, His and Hers with Madeline Smith, and Me and My Girl with Richard O'Sullivan.Brooke-Taylor also appeared regularly in advertisements, including the Christmas commercials for the Brentford Nylons chain of fabric stores, and in a public information film for the now-defunct E111 form.In 1971, he played the short, uncredited role of a computer scientist in the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory. After the end of The Goodies on UK television, Brooke-Taylor also worked again with Garden and Oddie on the animated television comedy series Bananaman, in which Brooke-Taylor was the narrator, as well as voicing the characters of King Zorg of the Nurks, Eddie the Gent, Auntie and Appleman. He also lent his voice to the children's TV series Gideon.Tim appeared, with Bill Oddie and Graeme Garden, in the Amnesty International show A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick) (during which they sang their hit song "Funky Gibbon"), and also appeared in the Amnesty International show The Secret Policeman's Other Ball in the sketches "Top of the Form" (with John Cleese, Graham Chapman, John Bird, John Fortune, Rowan Atkinson and Griff Rhys Jones), and "Cha Cha Cha" (with John Cleese and Graham Chapman).Brooke-Taylor, Graeme Garden, and Bill Oddie also appeared on Top of the Pops with their song "Funky Gibbon". Brooke-Taylor also appeared with Graeme Garden in the theatre production of The Unvarnished Truth.Other BBC radio programmes in which Brooke-Taylor played a part include the self-styled "antidote to panel games" I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue which started in 1972, and Tim still appears regularly. On 18 February 1981 Brooke-Taylor was the subject of Thames Television's This Is Your Life.Graeme Garden was a regular team captain on the political satire game show If I Ruled the World. Tim Brooke-Taylor appeared as a guest in one episode, and, during the game "I Couldn't Disagree More" he proposed that it was high time The Goodies episodes were repeated. Garden was obliged by the rules of the game to rebut this statement, and replied "I couldn't disagree more... it was time to repeat them ten, fifteen years ago." This was followed by uproarious applause from the studio audience.In 2004, Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden were co-presenters of Channel 4's daytime game show, Beat the Nation, in which they indulged in usual game show "banter", but took the quiz itself seriously. He has appeared on stage in Australia and England, usually as a middle class Englishman. Around 1982, he branched out into pantomime as the Dame in Dick Whittington. He is also the author (and co-author) of several humorous books based mainly around his radio and television work and the sports of golf and cricket. He also took part in the Pro-Celebrity Golf television series (opposite Bruce Forsyth). Brooke-Taylor appeared on the premiere episode of the BBC golf-based game show Full Swing.Brooke-Taylor was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2011 Birthday Honours.       
Filmography

Year Show/Film Role Notes 
1968 One Man Band Reporter / Young aristocrat Uncompleted/unreleased 
1971 Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory Computer Scientist   
1976 Pleasure at Her Majesty's Tim (with The Goodies)  
1981 The Secret Policeman's Other Ball Various  
1985 Morons from Outer Space Police Cop  
2010 Tangled Old Man Voice 

Selected television

Year Show/Film Role Notes 
1966 The Wednesday Play Uncredited role Episode: Cathy Come Home 
1967-68 At Last the 1948 Show Various characters Wrote for the series 
1968 How to Irritate People Various characters Also a writer 
1968-69 Marty Various characters Wrote for the series 
1968-69 Broaden Your Mind Various characters Wrote for the series 
1970-82 The Goodies Tim Wrote for the series 
1973-79 Hello Cheeky Himself Wrote for the series 
1983-84 Bananaman Various voices  
1984-88 Me and My Girl Derek Yates  
1987-88 You Must Be The Husband Tom Hammond  
1992 The Upper Hand Trevor Episode: Blind Date 
1997 One Foot in the Grave Derek Episode: Endgame 
1999   Various characters  
2004 Beat the Nation Quiz Co-Host Co-Host with Graeme Garden  
2005 Absolute Power Peter Harrow  
2005-2009 Heartbeat Ronnie Smethers Guest role 
2008 Agatha Christie's Marple Dr Edward Humbleby Episode: 'Murder is Easy' 
2009 Horne and Corden Vicar  
2010-11 Little Howard's Big Question Various characters  

Radio

Year Show/Film Role Notes 
1964-73 I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again Various Characters Wrote for the series 
1972 - Present I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue Himself Cult panel show  

Personal lifeBrooke-Taylor married Christine Weadon in 1968 and they have two sons, Ben and Edward.   He lives in Berkshire. Brooke-Taylor was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2011 Birthday Honours for services to light entertainment. 
BibliographyAs sole author


Rule Britannia
Tim Brooke-Taylor's Golf Bag
Tim Brooke-Taylor's Cricket Box

As co-author

Tim Brooke-Taylor also co-wrote the following books with the other members of The Goodies:




The Goodies File
The Goodies Book of Criminal Records
The Making of The Goodies Disaster Movie


Footlights presidency 
 
 
 
Other informationTim Brooke-Taylor served the University of St Andrews as Rector between 1979 and 1982.[1]He is an honorary Vice-President of Derby County F.C.. 
References 
External links

Tim Brooke-Taylor – BBC Guide to Comedy
Tim Brooke-Taylor – The Museum of Broadcast Communication
Tim Brooke-Taylor – London Speaker Bureau
Tim Brooke-Taylor biography – Personally Speaking – Norman Phillips Organisation
Tim Brooke-Taylor – BBC – I'm Sorry, I Haven't a Clue
Tim Brooke-Taylor – TV Comedy People
 
 
Tim Brooke-Taylor Interview Web Wombat Theatre
ISIHAC interviews – with Tim Brooke-Taylor, Graeme Garden, and Barry Cryer
The Origin of Monty Python – mentions Tim, ISIRTA and "At Last the 1948 Show"
Radio Ha Ha interview – Tim discusses his career in Episode 1 of Australian comedy podcast Radio Ha Ha
"A Clump of Plinths" – the 1963 Cambridge Footlights Club revue – later renamed "Cambridge Circus" (this was the Footlights revue during the time when Tim Brooke-Taylor was President of the Footlights.  Tim was also a member of the revue cast.
OBEs all round - Goodies pair honoured
Graeme Garden thought that OBE letter was a bill
Birthday Honours List 2011 in pictures
Goodies pair "thrilled" with OBEs
Tim Brooke-Taylor: 'Yes, I do miss Humphrey Lyttelton. He told the filthiest jokes'

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DEFAULTSORT

















 
 
 
 
 
	Anders Hejlsberg
 Anders Hejlsberg (born December 1960) Hejlsberg states in a video at the Microsoft Museum that his birthdate is 1960, but most other sources say 1961. At TechEd 2006 in Barcelona, Anders confirmed his birthdate as December 1960  is a prominent Danish software engineer who co-designed several popular and commercially successful programming languages and development tools. He was the original author of Turbo Pascal and the chief architect of Delphi. He currently works for Microsoft as the lead architect of C#    and core developer on TypeScript.
Early lifeHejlsberg was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, and studied engineering at the Technical University of Denmark but did not graduate. Hejlsberg states in this video that he never graduated  While at the university in 1980, he began writing programs for the Nascom microcomputer, including a Pascal compiler which was initially marketed as the Blue Label Software Pascal for the Nascom-2.  However, he soon rewrote it for CP/M and DOS, marketing it first as Compas Pascal and later as PolyPascal. Later the product was licensed to Borland, and integrated into an IDE to become the Turbo Pascal system. Turbo Pascal competed with PolyPascal. The compiler itself was largely inspired by the "Tiny Pascal" compiler in Niklaus Wirth's "Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs", one of the most influential computer science books of the time. Anders and his partners ran a computer store in Copenhagen and marketed accounting systems. Their company, PolyData, was the distributor for Microsoft products in Denmark which put them at odds with Borland. Philippe Kahn and Anders first met in 1986. For all those years, Niels Jensen, one of Borland's founders and its majority shareholder, had successfully handled the relationship between Borland and PolyData. 
At BorlandIn Borland's hands, Turbo Pascal became one of the most commercially successful Pascal compilers.  Hejlsberg remained with PolyData until the company came under financial stress, at which time, in 1989 he moved to California and became Chief Engineer at Borland. There he remained until 1996. During this time he developed Turbo Pascal further, and eventually became the chief architect for the team which produced the replacement for Turbo Pascal, Delphi.
At MicrosoftIn 1996, Hejlsberg left Borland and joined Microsoft. One of his first achievements was the J++ programming language and the Windows Foundation Classes; he also became a Microsoft Distinguished Engineer and Technical Fellow. Since 2000, he has been the lead architect of the team developing the language C#. In 2012 Hejlsberg announced his new project TypeScript - a superset of JavaScript.
AwardsHe received the 2001 Dr. Dobb's Excellence in Programming Award for his work on Turbo Pascal, Delphi, C# and the Microsoft .NET Framework.Together with Shon Katzenberger, Scott Wiltamuth, Todd Proebsting, Erik Meijer, Peter Hallam and Peter Sollich,  Anders was recently awarded a Technical Recognition Award for Outstanding Technical Achievement for their work on the C# language. A video about this is available at Microsoft Channel 9. 
Published work

The C# Programming Language, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, ISBN 0-321-33443-4, June 9, 2006
The C# Programming Language, 3rd Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, ISBN 0-321-56299-2, October 18, 2008
The C# Programming Language, 4th Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, ISBN 0-321-74176-5, ISBN 978-0-321-74176-9, October 2010


References 
External links

JavaWorld of 1997 writes how Hejlsberg went to Microsoft: Microsoft offered Anders Hejlsberg a signing bonus of US$500,000 and stock options. Microsoft doubled the bonus to US$1,000,000 after Borland made a counter-offer. Hejlsberg left Borland in October 1996.


Interviews

Software engineering radio Episode 97: Interview Anders Hejlsberg
Interview from .NET Developer's Journal, Vol 3 issue 2.
The C# Design Process
The Trouble with Checked Exceptions
Delegates, Components and Simplexity
Versioning, Virtual and Override
Contracts and Interoperability
Inappropriate Abstractions
Generics in C#, Java and C++
CLR Design Choices
Microsoft's Hejlsberg touts .NET, C-Omega (now LINQ) technologies
Deep Inside C#: An Interview with Microsoft Chief Architect Anders Hejlsberg
C#: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow
Video interview at channel9
Computerworld Interview with Anders on C#


Videos

Anders Hejlserg - Introducing TypeScript
Life and Times of Anders Hejlsberg
Anders Hejlsberg - Tour through computing industry history at the Microsoft Museum
Anders Hejlsberg - What's so great about generics?
Anders Hejlsberg - Programming data in C# 3.0
Anders Hejlsberg - What brought about the birth of the CLR
Anders Hejlsberg - The .NET Show: The .NET Framework
Anders Hejlsberg - The .NET Show: Programming in C#
Anders Hejlsberg - More C# Talk from C#'s Architect (Happy Birthday Video #3)
Anders Hejlsberg - LINQ
Anders Hejlsberg - Whiteboard with Anders Hejlsberg
Anders Hejlsberg - LINQ and Functional Programming
Outstanding Technical Achievement: C# Team
Anders Hejlsberg - The Future of C#
Anders Hejlsberg - The future of programming languages (JAOO Aarhus 2008)
The Future of C# and Visual Basic (PDC 2010)

 
 
 
DEFAULTSORT










 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Utah Phillips
 
Bruce Duncan "Utah" Phillips (May 15, 1935 – May 23, 2008) "Utah Phillips Has Left the Stage", KVMR, Nevada City, California, May 24, 2008. Accessed 2008-05-24.  was a labor organizer, folk singer, storyteller, poet  and the "Golden Voice of the Great Southwest". He described the struggles of labor unions and the power of direct action, self-identifying as an anarchist.    He often promoted the Industrial Workers of the World in his music, actions, and words.
Biography
Early yearsPhillips was born in Cleveland, Ohio, to Edwin Deroger Phillips and Frances Kathleen Coates.  He attended East High School in Salt Lake City, Utah.  His father, Edwin Phillips, was a labor organizer, and his parents' activism influenced much of his life's work.  Phillips was a card-carrying member of the Industrial Workers of the World, the "wobblies," headquartered in Chicago, Illinois. Phillips  rode the railroads, and wrote songs.     He served in the United States Army for three years beginning in 1956 (at the latest). Witnessing the devastation of post-war Korea greatly influenced his social and political thinking.
CareerFollowing service, he returned to  Salt Lake City, Utah, and joined Ammon Hennacy from the Catholic Worker Movement in establishing a mission house of hospitality named after the activist Joe Hill.   Phillips worked at the Joe Hill House for the next eight years, then ran for the U.S. Senate as a candidate of Utah's Peace and Freedom Party in 1968. He received 2,019 votes (0.5%) in an election won by Republican Wallace F. Bennett.  He also ran for president of the United States in 1976 for the Do-Nothing Party. He adopted the name U. Utah Phillips in emulation of country vocalist T. Texas Tyler. Phillips met folk singer Rosalie Sorrels in the early 1950s, and remained a close friend of hers.  It was Sorrels who started playing the songs that Phillips wrote, and through her his music began to spread. After leaving Utah in the late 1960s, he went to Saratoga Springs, New York, where he was befriended by the folk community at the Caffé Lena coffee house.  He became a staple performer there for a decade, and would return throughout his career.  Phillips was a proud member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or Wobblies).  His view of unions and politics were shaped by his parents, especially his Mom who was a labor organizer for the CIO.  But Phillips was more of a Christian anarchist and a pacifist, so found the modern-day Wobblies to be the perfect fit for him, an iconoclast and artist.  In recent years, perhaps no single person did more to spread the Wobbly gospel than Phillips, whose countless concerts were, in effect, organizing meetings for the cause of labor, unions, anarchism, pacifism, and the Wobblies.  He was a tremendous interpreter of classic Wobbly tunes including "Hallelujah, I'm a Bum," "The Preacher and the Slave," and "Bread and Roses."An avid trainhopper, Phillips recorded several albums of music related to the railroads, especially the era of steam locomotives. His first recorded album, Good Though!, is an example, and contains such songs as "Daddy, What's a Train?" and "Queen of the Rails" as well as what may be his most famous composition, "Moose Turd Pie"  wherein he tells a tall tale of his work as a gandy dancer repairing track in the Southwestern United States desert.In 1991 Phillips recorded, in one take, an album of song, poetry and short stories entitled I've Got To Know, inspired by his anger at the first Gulf War. The album includes "Enola Gay," his first composition written about the United States' atomic attack on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.Phillips was a mentor to Kate Wolf. He recorded songs and stories with Rosalie Sorrels on a CD called The Long Memory (1996), originally a college project "Worker's Doxology" for 1992 'cold-drill Magazine' Boise State University. His protégée, Ani DiFranco, recorded two CDs, The Past Didn't Go Anywhere (1996) and Fellow Workers (1999), with him.  He was nominated for a Grammy Award for his work with DiFranco. His "Green Rolling Hills" was made into a country hit by Emmylou Harris, and "The Goodnight-Loving Trail" became a classic as well, being recorded by Ian Tyson, Tom Waits, and others.
Later yearsThough known primarily for his work as a concert performer and labor organizer, Phillips also worked as an archivist, dishwasher, and warehouse-man.   Phillips was a member of various socio-political organizations and groups throughout his life. A strong supporter of labor struggles, he was a member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), the International Union of Mine, Mill, and Smelter Workers (Mine Mill), and the Travelling Musician's Union AFM Local 1000. In solidarity with the poor, he was also an honorary member of Dignity Village, a homeless community. A pacifist, he was a member of Veterans for Peace and the Peace Center of Nevada County. In his personal life, Phillips enjoyed varied hobbies and interests. These included Egyptology; amateur chemistry; linguistics; history (Asian, African, Mormon and world); futhark; debate; and poetry. He also enjoyed culinary hobbies, such as pickling, cooking and gardening. He married Joanna Robinson on July 31, 1989, in Nevada City. 

Phillips became an elder statesman for the folk music community, and a keeper of stories and songs that might otherwise have passed into obscurity. He was also a member of the great Traveling Nation, the community of hobos and railroad bums that populates the Midwest United States along the rail lines, and was an important keeper of their history and culture. He also became an honorary member of numerous folk societies in the U.S.A. and Canada. When Kate Wolf grew ill and was forced to cancel concerts, she asked Phillips to fill in. Suffering from an ailment which makes it more difficult to play guitar, Phillips hesitated, citing his declining guitar ability. "Nobody ever came just to hear you play," she said. Phillips told this story as a way of explaining how his style over the years became increasingly based on storytelling instead of just songs. He was a gifted storyteller and monologist, and his concerts generally had an even mix of spoken word and sung content. He attributed much of his success to his personality. "It is better to be likeable than talented," he often said, self-deprecatingly.Until it lost its funding, Phillips hosted his own weekly radio show, Loafer's Glory: The Hobo Jungle of the Mind, originating on KVMR and nationally syndicated.Phillips lived in Nevada City, California, for 21 years where he worked on the start-up of the Hospitality House, a homeless shelter,  and the Peace and Justice Center. "It's my town. Nevada City is a primary seed-bed for community organizing." In August 2007, Phillips announced that he would undergo catheter ablation to address his heart problems.  Later that autumn, Phillips announced that due to health problems he could no longer tour.  By January 2008, he decided against a heart transplant. Phillips died May 23, 2008 in Nevada City, California, from complications of heart disease, at the age of 73.  He was survived by his wife, sons, Duncan and Brendan, and a daughter, Morrigan.  Following a private service, a public memorial was held on June 1, in Pioneer Park, in Nevada City. His service was officiated by Meghan Cefalu, a Unitarian Universalist pastor.  Phillips is buried in Forest View Cemetery in Nevada City.
Discography


Solo albums

1961 Nobody Knows Me (Prestige)
1974 Good Though! (Philo)
1975 El Capitan (Philo)
1980 All Used Up: A Scrapbook (Philo)
1983 We Have Fed You All a Thousand Years (Philo)
1992 I've Got to Know (Alcazar) (reissued 2003 by AK Press)
1996 The Past Didn't Go Anywhere - with Ani Difranco (Righteous Babe Records)
1999 Fellow Workers - with Ani Difranco (Righteous Babe Records)
1997 Loafer's Glory - with Mark Ross (Red House Records)
1997 The Telling Takes Me Home (includes tracks from El Capitan and All Used Up) (Philo/Rounder)
1999 The Moscow Hold (Red House Records)
2000 Making Speech Free (Free Dirt Records)
2005 Starlight on the Rails: A Songbook (4-cd Compilation) (AK Press/Daemon)


 
Other albums

1985 Don't Mourn - Organize!: Songs Of Labor Songwriter Joe Hill - Various Artists (Smithsonian Folkways)
1992 Rebel Voices: Songs of the Industrial Workers of the World - Various Artists (Flying Fish)
1996 The Long Memory - Utah Phillips and Rosalie Sorrels (Red House Records)
1997 Heart Songs: The Old Time Country Songs of Utah Phillips - Jody Stecher and Kate Brislin (Rounder)
1997 Legends of Folk - Utah Phillips, Ramblin' Jack Elliot and Spider John Koerner (Red House Records)
2001 The Rose Tattoo Live - Trains, Tramps And Traditions The Rose Tattoo (Cookie Man Music)
2008 May Day At The Pabst - Utah Philips, Larry Penn, recorded live in Milwaukee in 2006 (Cookie Man Music)
2008 Strangers in Another Country: The Songs of Bruce "Utah" Phillips - Rosalie Sorrels (Red House Records)
2009 Singing Through the Hard Times: A Tribute to Utah Phillips - Various Artists (Righteous Babe Records)
 

Notes and references 
External links 
 

September 2003 Interview in The Progressive
Biography from the 1997 Folk Alliance Lifetime Achievement Awards
Summer 2005 Interview in "Unlikely Stories"
Fall 2005 Interview in YES! Magazine
Turtle Vision photo gallery of Utah Phillips
  (Radio broadcast)
The “Golden Voice of the Great Southwest”, Utah Phillips memorial page on Democracy Now!
Utah Phillips interview with David Kupfer, The Progressive, September 2003.
"Voting for the First Time", by Carolyn Crane. The Nation. October 12, 2004.
 
 
[1], cover performance of "All Used Up" by Suzanne Langille in London, May 14, 2011.

 
 
DEFAULTSORT


























 
 
 
	Titus

For the personal name, see Titus (praenomen).  For other uses, see Titus (disambiguation).
 
 
Titus ( ;  30 December 39 – 13 September 81), was Roman Emperor from 79 to 81. A member of the Flavian dynasty, Titus succeeded his father Vespasian upon his death, thus becoming the first Roman Emperor to come to the throne after his own father.Prior to becoming Emperor, Titus gained renown as a military commander, serving under his father in Judaea during the First Jewish-Roman War. The campaign came to a brief halt with the death of emperor Nero in 68, launching Vespasian's bid for the imperial power during the Year of the Four Emperors. When Vespasian was declared Emperor on 1 July 69, Titus was left in charge of ending the Jewish rebellion. In 70, he successfully laid siege to and destroyed the city and Temple of Jerusalem. For this achievement Titus was awarded a triumph; the Arch of Titus commemorates his victory to this day.Under the rule of his father, Titus gained notoriety in Rome serving as prefect of the Praetorian Guard, and for carrying on a controversial relationship with the Jewish queen Berenice. Despite concerns over his character, Titus ruled to great acclaim following the death of Vespasian in 79, and was considered a good emperor by Suetonius and other contemporary historians. As emperor, he is best known for completing the Colosseum and for his generosity in relieving the suffering caused by two disasters, the Mount Vesuvius eruption of 79 and a fire in Rome in 80. After barely two years in office, Titus died of a fever on 13 September 81. He was deified by the Roman Senate and succeeded by his younger brother Domitian.
Early lifeTitus was born in Rome, probably on 30 December 39 AD, as the eldest son of Titus Flavius Vespasianus—commonly known as Vespasian—and Domitilla the Elder.  He had one younger sister, Domitilla the Younger (b. 45), and one younger brother, also named Titus Flavius Domitianus (b. 51), but commonly referred to as Domitian.Decades of civil war during the 1st century BC had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome, which was gradually replaced in prominence by a new provincial nobility during the early part of the 1st century. Jones (1992), p. 3  One such family was the gens Flavia, which rose from relative obscurity to prominence in just four generations, acquiring wealth and status under the Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Titus's great-grandfather, Titus Flavius Petro, had served as a centurion under Pompey during Caesar's civil war. His military career ended in disgrace when he fled the battlefield at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC. Jones (1992), p. 1  Nevertheless, Petro managed to improve his status by marrying the extremely wealthy Tertulla, whose fortune guaranteed the upwards mobility of Petro's son Titus Flavius Sabinus I, Titus's grandfather. Jones (1992), p. 2  Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia. By marrying Vespasia Polla he allied himself to the more prestigious patrician gens Vespasia, ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus II and Vespasian to the senatorial rank. The political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor, aedile and praetor, and culminated with a consulship in 51, the year Domitian was born. As a military commander, he gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 43.  What little is known of Titus's early life has been handed down to us by Suetonius, who records that he was brought up at the imperial court in the company of Britannicus, Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 2  the son of emperor Claudius, who would be murdered by Nero in 55. The story was even told that Titus was reclining next to Britannicus, the night he was murdered, and sipped of the poison that was handed to him.  Further details on his education are scarce, but it seems he showed early promise in the military arts and was a skilled poet and orator both in Greek and Latin. 
He died 2 years after being dismissed.
Military careerFrom c. 57 to 59 he was a military tribune in Germania. He also served in Britannia, perhaps arriving c. 60 with reinforcements needed after the revolt of Boudica. In c. 63 he returned to Rome and married Arrecina Tertulla, daughter of a former Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. She died c. 65.  Titus then took a new wife of a much more distinguished family, Marcia Furnilla. However, Marcia's family was closely linked to the opposition to Nero. Her uncle Barea Soranus and his daughter Servilia were among those who perished after the failed Pisonian conspiracy of 65.  Some modern historians theorize that Titus divorced his wife because of her family's connection to the conspiracy.   He never re-married. Titus appears to have had multiple daughters,  at least one of them by Marcia Furnilla. Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 4  The only one known to have survived to adulthood was Julia Flavia, perhaps Titus's child by Arrecina, whose mother was also named Julia.  During this period Titus also practiced law and attained the rank of quaestor. 
Judaean campaigns 

In 66 the Jews of the Judaea Province revolted against the Roman Empire. Cestius Gallus, the legate of Syria, was defeated at the battle of Beth-Horon and forced to retreat from Jerusalem.  The pro-Roman king Agrippa II and his sister Berenice fled the city to Galilee where they later gave themselves up to the Romans. Nero appointed Vespasian to put down the rebellion, who was dispatched to the region at once with the fifth and tenth legions.  He was later joined by Titus at Ptolemais, bringing with him the fifteenth legion. Josephus, The War of the Jews    With a strength of 60,000 professional soldiers, the Romans prepared to sweep across Galilee and march on Jerusalem. The history of the war was covered in dramatic detail by the Roman-Jewish historian Josephus in his work The Wars of the Jews. Josephus served as a commander in the city of Jotapata when the Roman army invaded Galilee in 67. After an exhausting siege which lasted 47 days, the city fell, with an estimated 40,000 killed and the remaining Jewish resistance committing suicide.  Surviving a group suicide, Josephus surrendered to Vespasian and became a prisoner.  He later wrote that he provided the Romans with intelligence on the ongoing revolt.  By 68, the entire coast and the north of Judaea were subjugated by the Roman army, with decisive victories won at Taricheae and Gamala, where Titus distinguished himself as a skilled general.  
Year of the Four Emperors
The last and most significant fortress of Jewish resistance was Jerusalem. The campaign came to a sudden halt when news arrived of Nero's death. Josephus, The Wars of the Jews    Almost simultaneously, the Roman Senate had declared Galba, then governor of Hispania, as Emperor of Rome. Vespasian decided to await further orders, and sent Titus to greet the new princeps.  Before reaching Italy, Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho, governor of Lusitania, and that Vitellius and his armies in Germania were preparing to march on the capital, intent on overthrowing Otho. Not wanting to risk being taken hostage by one side or the other, he abandoned the journey to Rome and rejoined his father in Judaea. Tacitus, Histories    Meanwhile, Otho was defeated in the First Battle of Bedriacum and committed suicide. When the news spread across the armies in Judaea and Ægyptus, they took matters into their own hands and declared Vespasian emperor on 1 July 69.  Vespasian accepted, and through negotiations by Titus, joined forces with Gaius Licinius Mucianus, governor of Syria.  A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus, while Vespasian travelled to Alexandria, leaving Titus in charge to end the Jewish rebellion.   By the end of 69, the forces of Vitellius had been beaten, and Vespasian was officially declared emperor by the Senate on 21 December, thus ending the Year of the Four Emperors. 
Siege of Jerusalem
Meanwhile the Jews had become embroiled in a civil conflict of their own, splitting the resistance in the city among two factions; the Sicarii led by Simon Bar Giora, and the Zealots led by John of Gischala.  Titus seized the opportunity to begin the assault on Jerusalem. The Roman army was joined by the twelfth legion, which was previously defeated under Cestius Gallus, and from Alexandria Vespasian sent Tiberius Julius Alexander, governor of Ægyptus, to act as Titus's second in command.  Titus surrounded the city, with three legions (Vth, XIIth and XVth) on the western side and one (Xth) on the Mount of Olives to the east. He put pressure on the food and water supplies of the inhabitants by allowing pilgrims to enter the city to celebrate Passover, and then refusing them egress. Jewish raids continuously harassed the Roman army, one of which nearly resulted in Titus being captured. After attempts by Josephus to negotiate a surrender had failed, the Romans resumed hostilities and quickly breached the first and second walls of the city.  To intimidate the resistance, Titus ordered deserters from the Jewish side to be crucified around the city wall.  By this time the Jews had been exhausted by famine, and when the weak third wall was breached, bitter street fighting ensued.  The Romans finally captured the Antonia Fortress and began a frontal assault on the gates of the Temple.  According to Josephus, Titus had ordered that the Temple should not be destroyed , but while the fighting around the gates continued, a soldier hurled a torch inside one of the windows, which quickly set the entire building ablaze.  The later Christian chronicler Sulpicius Severus, possibly drawing on a lost portion of Tacitus' Histories, claims that Titus favoured destruction of the Temple.  The Temple was completely demolished, after which Titus's soldiers proclaimed him imperator in honor of the victory.  Jerusalem was sacked and much of the population killed or dispersed. Josephus claims that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, of which a majority were Jewish. Josephus, The Wars of the Jews    97,000 were captured and enslaved, including Simon Bar Giora and John of Gischala.  Many fled to areas around the Mediterranean. Titus reportedly refused to accept a wreath of victory, as he claimed that he had not won the victory on his own, but had been the vehicle through which their God had manifested his wrath against his people. 
Heir to Vespasian
Unable to sail to Italy during the winter, Titus celebrated elaborate games at Caesarea Maritima and Berytus, then travelled to Zeugma on the Euphrates, where he was presented with a crown by Vologases I of Parthia. While visiting Antioch he confirmed the traditional rights of the Jews in that city.  On his way to Alexandria, he stopped in Memphis to consecrate the sacred bull Apis. According to Suetonius, this caused consternation; the ceremony required Titus to wear a diadem, which the Romans associated with kingship, and the partisanship of Titus's legions had already led to fears that he might rebel against his father. Titus returned quickly to Rome – hoping, says Suetonius, to allay any suspicions about his conduct. Upon his arrival in the city in 71, Titus was awarded a triumph.  Accompanied by Vespasian and Domitian he rode into the city, enthusiastically saluted by the Roman populace and preceded by a lavish parade containing treasures and captives from the war. Josephus describes a procession with large amounts of gold and silver carried along the route, followed by elaborate re-enactments of the war, Jewish prisoners, and finally the treasures taken from the Temple of Jerusalem, including the Menorah and the Pentateuch.  Simon Bar Giora was executed in the Forum, after which the procession closed with religious sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter. 
The triumphal Arch of Titus, which stands at one entrance to the Forum, memorializes the victory of Titus.
With Vespasian declared emperor, Titus and his brother Domitian likewise received the title of Caesar from the Senate.  In addition to sharing tribunician power with his father, Titus held seven consulships during Vespasian's reign Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 6  and acted as his secretary, appearing in the Senate on his behalf.  More crucially, he was appointed commander of the Praetorian Guard, ensuring their loyalty to the Emperor and further solidifying Vespasian's position as a legitimate ruler.  In this capacity he achieved considerable notoriety in Rome for his violent actions, frequently ordering the execution of suspected traitors on the spot.  When in 79, a plot by Aulus Caecina Alienus and Eprius Marcellus to overthrow Vespasian was uncovered, Titus invited Alienus to dinner and ordered him to be stabbed before he had even left the room.  During the Jewish wars, Titus had begun a love affair with Berenice, sister of Agrippa II.  The Herodians had collaborated with the Romans during the rebellion, and Berenice herself had supported Vespasian upon his campaign to become emperor.  In 75, she returned to Titus and openly lived with him in the palace as his promised wife. The Romans were wary of the Eastern Queen and disapproved of their relationship.   When the pair was publicly denounced by Cynics in the theatre, Titus caved in to the pressure and sent her away, Cassius Dio, Roman History LXV.15  but his reputation further suffered.
Emperor
Succession
Vespasian died of an infection on 23 June 79 AD,  and was immediately succeeded by his son Titus. Cassius Dio, Roman History LXVI.18  Because of his many alleged vices, many Romans feared at this point that he would be another Nero. Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 7  Against these expectations, however, Titus proved to be an effective Emperor and was well loved by the population, who praised him highly when they found that he possessed the greatest virtues instead of vices.  One of his first acts as Emperor was to publicly order a halt to trials based on treason charges, Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 8  which had long plagued the principate. The law of treason, or maiestas law, was originally intended to prosecute those who had corruptly 'impaired the people and majesty of Rome' by any revolutionary action. Tacitus, Annals    Under Augustus, however, this custom had been revived and applied to cover slander or libellous writings as well,  eventually leading to a long cycle of trials and executions under such emperors as Tiberius, Caligula and Nero, spawning entire networks of informers that terrorized Rome's political system for decades.  Titus put an end to this practice, against himself or anyone else, declaring: "It is impossible for me to be insulted or abused in any way. For I do naught that deserves censure, and I care not for what is reported falsely. As for the emperors who are dead and gone, they will avenge themselves in case anyone does them a wrong, if in very truth they are demigods and possess any power." Cassius Dio, Roman History LXVI.19  Consequently, no senators were put to death during his reign;  he thus kept to his promise that he would assume the office of Pontifex Maximus "for the purpose of keeping his hands unstained". Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 9  The informants were publicly punished and banished from the city, and Titus further prevented abuses by introducing legislation that made it unlawful for persons to be tried under different laws for the same offense.  Finally, when Berenice returned to Rome, he sent her away. As Emperor he became known for his generosity, and Suetonius states that upon realising he had brought no benefit to anyone during a whole day he remarked, "Friends, I have lost a day." 
Challenges
Although his administration was marked by a relative absence of major military or political conflicts, Titus faced a number of major disasters during his brief reign. On 24 August 79, two months after his accession, Mount Vesuvius erupted,  resulting in the almost complete destruction of life and property in the cities and resort communities around the Bay of Naples. The cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum were buried under metres of stone and lava,  killing thousands of citizens.  Titus appointed two ex-consuls to organise and coordinate the relief effort, while personally donating large amounts of money from the imperial treasury to aid the victims of the volcano.  Additionally, he visited Pompeii once after the eruption and again the following year. Cassius Dio, Roman History LXVI.24 During the second visit, in spring of AD 80, a fire broke out in Rome, burning large parts of the city for three days and three nights.   Although the extent of the damage was not as disastrous as during the Great Fire of 64—crucially sparing the many districts of insulae—Cassius Dio records a long list of important public buildings that were destroyed, including Agrippa's Pantheon, the Temple of Jupiter, the Diribitorium, parts of Pompey's Theatre and the Saepta Julia among others.  Once again, Titus personally compensated for the damaged regions.  According to Suetonius, a plague similarly struck during the fire.  The nature of the disease, however, or the death toll are unknown.Meanwhile war had resumed in Britannia, where Gnaeus Julius Agricola pushed further into Caledonia and managed to establish several forts there.  As a result of his actions, Titus received the title of Imperator for the fifteenth time. His reign also saw the rebellion led by Terentius Maximus, one of several false Neros who continued to appear throughout the 70s. Tacitus, Histories    Although Nero was primarily known as a universally hated tyrant—there is evidence that for much of his reign, he remained highly popular in the eastern provinces. Reports that Nero had in fact survived the assassination attempts were fueled by the vague circumstances surrounding his death and several prophecies foretelling his return.  According to Cassius Dio, Terentius Maximus resembled Nero in voice and appearance and, like him, sang to the lyre.  Terentius established a following in Asia minor but was soon forced to flee beyond the Euphrates, taking refuge with the Parthians.   In addition, sources state that Titus discovered that his brother Domitian was plotting against him but refused to have him killed or banished.  Cassius Dio, Roman History LXVI.26 
Public works
Construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre, presently better known as the Colosseum, was begun in 70 under Vespasian and finally completed in 80 under Titus.  In addition to providing spectacular entertainments to the Roman populace, the building was also conceived as a gigantic triumphal monument to commemorate the military achievements of the Flavians during the Jewish wars.  The inaugural games lasted for a hundred days and were said to be extremely elaborate, including gladiatorial combat, fights between wild animals (elephants and cranes), mock naval battles for which the theatre was flooded, horse races and chariot races. Cassius Dio, Roman History LXVI.25  During the games, wooden balls were dropped into the audience, inscribed with various prizes (clothing, gold, or even slaves), which could then be traded for the designated item. Adjacent to the amphitheatre, within the precinct of Nero's Golden House, Titus had also ordered the construction of a new public bath-house, which was to bear his name.  Construction of this building was hastily finished to coincide with the completion of the Flavian Amphitheatre. Practice of the imperial cult was revived by Titus, though apparently it met with some difficulty as Vespasian was not deified until six months after his death.  To further honor and glorify the Flavian dynasty, foundations were laid for what would later become the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, which was finished by Domitian.  
DeathAt the closing of the games, Titus officially dedicated the amphitheatre and the baths, which was to be his final recorded act as Emperor.  He set out for the Sabine territories but fell ill at the first posting station Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 10  where he died of a fever, reportedly in the same farm-house as his father. Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 11  Allegedly, the last words he uttered before passing away were: "I have made but one mistake".   Titus had ruled the Roman Empire for just over two years, from the death of his father in 79 to his own on 13 September 81.  He was succeeded by Domitian, whose first act as emperor was to deify his brother. Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Domitian 2 Historians have speculated on the exact nature of his death, and to which mistake Titus alluded in his final words. Philostratus writes that he was poisoned by Domitian with a sea hare, and that his death had been foretold to him by Apollonius of Tyana.  Suetonius and Cassius Dio maintain he died of natural causes, but both accuse Domitian of having left the ailing Titus for dead.   Consequently, Dio believes Titus's mistake refers to his failure to have his brother executed when he was found to be openly plotting against him. According to the Babylonian Talmud (Gittin 56b), an insect flew into Titus's nose and picked at his brain for seven years. He noticed that the sound of a blacksmith hammering caused the ensuing pain to abate, so he paid for blacksmiths to hammer nearby him; however, the effect wore off and the insect resumed its gnawing. When he died, they opened his skull and found the insect had grown to the size of a bird. The Talmud gives this as the cause of his death and interprets it as divine retribution for his wicked actions. 
Ancestry 
  
 
Legacy
HistoriographyTitus's record among ancient historians stands as one of the most exemplary of any emperor. All the surviving accounts from this period, many of them written by his own contemporaries, present a highly favourable view towards Titus. His character has especially prospered in comparison with that of his brother Domitian.The Wars of the Jews offers a first-hand, eye-witness account on the Jewish rebellion and the character of Titus. The neutrality of Josephus' writings has come into question however as he was heavily indebted to the Flavians. In 71, he arrived in Rome in the entourage of Titus, became a Roman citizen and took on the Roman nomen Flavius and praenomen Titus from his patrons. He received an annual pension and lived in the palace.  It was while in Rome, and under Flavian patronage, that Josephus wrote all of his known works. The War of the Jews is heavily slanted against the leaders of the revolt, portraying the rebellion as weak and unorganized, and even blaming the Jews for causing the war.  The credibility of Josephus as a historian has subsequently come under fire. Another contemporary of Titus was Publius Cornelius Tacitus, who started his public career in 80 or 81 and credits the Flavian dynasty with his elevation.  The Histories—his account of this period—was published during the reign of Trajan. Unfortunately only the first five books from this work have survived until the present day, with the text on Titus's and Domitian's reign entirely lost.Suetonius Tranquilius gives a short but highly favourable account on Titus's reign in The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 1  emphasizing his military achievements and his generosity as Emperor, in short describing him as follows: Titus, of the same surname as his father, was the delight and darling of the human race; such surpassing ability had he, by nature, art, or good fortune, to win the affections of all men, and that, too, which is no easy task, while he was emperor.  Finally, Cassius Dio wrote his Roman History over a hundred years after the death of Titus. He shares a similar outlook as Suetonius, possibly even using the latter as a source, but is more reserved, noting: His satisfactory record may also have been due to the fact that he survived his accession but a very short time, for he was thus given no opportunity for wrongdoing. For he lived after this only two years, two months and twenty days — in addition to the thirty-nine years, five months and twenty-five days he had already lived at that time. In this respect, indeed, he is regarded as having equalled the long reign of Augustus, since it is maintained that Augustus would never have been loved had he lived a shorter time, nor Titus had he lived longer. For Augustus, though at the outset he showed himself rather harsh because of the wars and the factional strife, was later able, in the course of time, to achieve a brilliant reputation for his kindly deeds; Titus, on the other hand, ruled with mildness and died at the height of his glory, whereas, if he had lived a long time, it might have been shown that he owes his present fame more to good fortune than to merit.  Pliny the Elder, who later died during the eruption of Mount Vesuvius,  dedicated his Naturalis Historia to Titus. In contrast to the ideal portrayal of Titus in Roman histories,  in Jewish memory "Titus the Wicked" is remembered as an evil oppressor and destroyer of the Temple.  For example, one legend in the Babylonian Talmud describes Titus as having had sex with a whore on a Torah scroll inside the Temple during its destruction. 
Titus in later arts
The war in Judaea and the life of Titus, particularly his relationship with Berenice, have inspired writers and artists through the centuries. The bas-relief in the Arch of Titus has been influential in the depiction of the destruction of Jerusalem, with the Menorah frequently being used to symbolise the looting of the Second Temple.
Literature

Bérénice, a play by Jean Racine (1670) which focuses on the love affair between Titus and Berenice.
Tite et Bérénice, a play by Pierre Corneille which was in competition with Racine the same year, and concerns the same subject matter.
La clemenza di Tito, an opera by Mozart, about a fictional romance between Emperor Titus and Vitellia, daughter of Vitellius.
The Josephus Trilogy, novels by Lion Feuchtwanger, about the life of Flavius Josephus and his relation with the Flavian dynasty.
Der jüdische Krieg (Josephus), 1932
Die Söhne (The Jews of Rome), 1935
Der Tag wird kommen (The day will come, Josephus and the Emperor), 1942
The Marcus Didius Falco novels, which take place during the reign of Vespasian.
Titus figures prominently in "The Pearl-Maiden", a novel by H. Rider Haggard, first published in 1901.
The Roman Mysteries, a series of children's books which take place during the reign of Titus.
The High School Latin textbook series Ecce Romani takes place during the reign of Titus.


Paintings

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus by Wilhelm von Kaulbach (1846). Oil on canvas, 585 x 705 cm. Neue Pinakothek, Munich. An allegorical depiction of the destruction of Jerusalem, dramatically centered around the figure of Titus.
The Destruction of the Temple at Jerusalem by Nicolas Poussin (1637). Oil on canvas, 147 x 198,5 cm. Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna. Depicts the destruction and looting of the Second Temple by the Roman army led by Titus.
The Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem by Francesco Hayez (1867). Oil on canvas, 183 x 252 cm. Galleria d'Arte Moderna, Venice. Depicts the destruction and looting of the Second Temple by the Roman army.
The Siege and Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans Under the Command of Titus, A.D. 70 by David Roberts (1850). Oil on canvas, 136 x 197 cm. Private collection. Depicts the burning and looting of Jerusalem by the Roman army under Titus.
The Triumph of Titus and Vespasian by Giulio Romano (1540). Oil on wood, 170 x 120 cm. Louvre, Paris. Depicts Titus and Vespasian as they ride into Rome on a triumphal chariot, preceded by a parade carrying spoils from the war in Judaea. The painting anachronistically features the Arch of Titus, which was not completed until the reign of Domitian.
The Triumph of Titus by Lawrence Alma-Tadema (1885). Oil on canvas. Private collection. This painting depicts the triumphal procession of Titus and his family. Alma-Tadema was known for his meticulous historical research on the ancient world.  Vespasian, dressed as Pontifex Maximus, walks at the head of his family, followed by Domitian and his first wife Domitia Longina, who he had only recently married. Behind Domitian follows Titus, dressed in religious regalia. An exchange of glances between Titus and Domitia suggests an affair which historians have speculated upon.  


Notes 
References

 
 


Further reading 
Primary sources

Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus, Latin text with English translation
Cassius Dio, Roman History, Books 65 and 66, English translation
, English translation
,   and  , English translation


Secondary material

Coinage of Titus at Wildwinds.com
A private collection of Titus denarii.
Biography of Titus at roman-emperors.org
[3] (Austin Simmons, The Cipherment of the Franks Casket) Titus is twice depicted on the back side of the Franks Casket.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    










 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	James Dewar
 
 Sir James Dewar FRS (20 September 1842 – 27 March 1923) was a Scottish chemist and physicist.  He is probably best-known today for his invention of the Dewar flask, which he used in conjunction with extensive research into the liquefaction of gases. He was also particularly interested in atomic and molecular spectroscopy, working in these fields for more than 25 years.
Early lifeJames Dewar was born in Kincardine-on-Forth in 1842, the youngest of six boys.  He lost his parents at the age of 15.  He was educated at Dollar Academy and the University of Edinburgh, where he studied under Lord Playfair, and later became Lord Playfair's assistant. Dewar would also study under August Kekulé at Ghent.
CareerIn 1875, Dewar was elected Jacksonian professor of natural experimental philosophy at the University of Cambridge, becoming a fellow of Peterhouse.  He became a member of the Royal Institution and later, replaced Dr. John Hall Gladstone in the role of Fullerian Professor of Chemistry in 1877. Dewar was also the President of the Chemical Society in 1897 and the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1902, as well as serving on the Royal Commission established to examine London's water supply from 1893 to 1894 and the Committee on Explosives. It was whilst he was serving on the Committee on Explosives that he and Frederick Augustus Abel developed cordite, a smokeless gunpowder alternative.In 1867 Dewar described several chemical formulae for benzene.   Ironically, one of the formulae, which does not represent benzene correctly and was not advocated by Dewar, is sometimes still called Dewar benzene. His scientific work covers a wide field - his earlier papers cover a wide range of topics; organic chemistry, Hydrogen and its physical constants, high temperature research, the temperature of the sun and of the electric spark, electro-photometry and the chemistry of the electric arc. With Professor J. G. McKendrick, of Glasgow, he investigated the physiological action of light, and examined the changes which take place in the electrical condition of the retina under its influence. With Professor G. D. Living, one of his colleagues at Cambridge, he began in 1878 a long series of spectroscopic observations, the later of which were devoted to the spectroscopic examination of various gaseous elements separated from atmospheric air by the aid of low temperatures; and he was joined by Professor J. A. Fleming, of University College London, in the investigation of the electrical behaviour of substances cooled to very low temperatures. 
His name is most widely known in connection with his work on the liquefaction of the so-called permanent gases and his researches at temperatures approaching absolute zero. His interest in this branch of physics and chemistry dates back at least as far as 1874, when he discussed the "Latent Heat of Liquid Gases" before the British Association. In 1878 he devoted a Friday evening lecture at the Royal Institution to the then recent work of Louis Paul Cailletet and Raoul Pictet, and exhibited for the first time in Great Britain the working of the Cailletet apparatus. Six years later, again at the Royal Institution, he described the researches of Zygmunt Florenty Wróblewski and Karol Olszewski, and illustrated for the first time in public the liquefaction of oxygen and air. Soon afterwards he built a machine from which the liquefied gas could be drawn off through a valve for use as a cooling agent, before using the liquid oxygen in research work related to meteorites; about the same time he also obtained oxygen in the solid state. By 1891 he had designed and built, at the Royal Institution, machinery which yielded liquid oxygen in industrial quantities, and towards the end of that year he showed that both liquid oxygen and liquid ozone are strongly attracted by a magnet. About 1892 the idea occurred to him of using vacuum-jacketed vessels for the storage of liquid gases - the Dewar flask (otherwise known as a Thermos or vacuum flask) - the invention for which he became most famous. The vacuum flask was so efficient at keeping heat out that it was found possible to preserve the liquids for comparatively long periods, making examination of their optical properties possible. Dewar did not profit from the widespread adoption of his vacuum flask - he lost a court case against Thermos concerning the patent for his invention. While Dewar was recognised as the inventor, because he did not patent his invention there was no way to stop Thermos from using the design.     He next experimented with a high pressure hydrogen jet by which low temperatures were realized through the Joule–Thomson effect, and the successful results he obtained led him to build at the Royal Institution a large regenerative cooling refrigerating machine. Using this machine in 1898, liquid hydrogen was collected for the first time, solid hydrogen following in 1899. He tried to liquefy the last remaining gas, Helium, which condenses into a liquid at −268.9°C, but owing to a number of factors, including a lack of Helium with which to work, Dewar was preceded by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes as the first person to produce liquid helium, in 1908. Onnes would later be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his research into the properties of matter at low temperatures - Dewar was nominated several times but never successful in winning the Nobel Prize. In 1905 he began to investigate the gas-absorbing powers of charcoal when cooled to low temperatures, and applied his research to the production of high vacuums, which were useful for further experiments in atomic physics. Dewar would continue his research work into the properties of elements at low temperatures, specifically low-temperature calorimetry, until the outbreak of World War I. The Royal Institution laboratories lost a number of staff to the war effort, both in fighting and scientific roles, and after the war, Dewar had little interest in restarting the serious research work which went on before the War. Shortages of scholars necessarily compounded the problems. His research during and after the war mainly involved investigating surface tension in soap bubbles, rather than further work into the properties of matter at low temperatures.
Honors and AwardsWhilst Dewar was never recognised by the Swedish Academy, he was recognised by many other institutions both before and after his death, both in Britain and overseas. The Royal Society elected him a Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1877 and bestowed their Rumford (1894), Davy (1909), and Copley Medal(1916) medals upon him for his work, as well as inviting him to deliver their Bakerian Lecture in 1901.  In 1899 he became the first recipient of the Hodgkins gold medal of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., for his contributions to our knowledge of the nature and properties of atmospheric air. In 1904 he was the first British subject to receive the Lavoisier medal of the French Academy of Sciences, and in 1906 he was the first to be awarded the Matteucci medal of the Italian Society of Sciences. He was knighted in 1904 and awarded the Gunning Victoria Jubilee Prize for 1900-1904 by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1908 he was awarded the Albert medal of The Society of Arts. A lunar crater has been named in his honor.James Dewar died in London in 1923, still holding the office of Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution, having refused to retire.  He was cremated at the Golders Green Crematorium where his ashes remain.
Selected publications

 , G. D. Living and J. Dewar, Cambridge University Press, 1915


See also

Timeline of low-temperature technology
Timeline of hydrogen technologies


Notes 
Further reading


 



Bellis, Mary, "Inventors Sir James Dewar" from about.com



Meiklejohn, William, "Tulliallan: Four lads o’ pairts: Sir James Dewar (1842-1923)" from the Kincardine Local History Group



 



 , Liquid Air and the Liquefaction of Gases, Norman W. Henley and Co., New York, 1900, second edition (extensive description of Dewar's work on the liqufaction of gases)


External links 
 

Fullerian Professorships
Brief biography from the Royal Institution of Great Britain
Brief biography and picture
Another brief biography
 

 
   
DEFAULTSORT













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Ernst Mach
 Ernst Mach ( ) (February 18, 1838 – February 19, 1916) was an Austrian physicist and philosopher, noted for his contributions to physics such as the Mach number and the study of shock waves. As a philosopher of science, he was a major influence on logical positivism and through his criticism of Newton, a forerunner of Einstein's relativity.
BiographyErnst Waldfried Josef Wenzel Mach was born in Chrlice ( ), Moravia (then in the Austrian empire, now part of Brno in the Czech Republic). His father, who had graduated from Charles University in Prague, acted as tutor to the noble Brethon family in Zlín, eastern Moravia. His grandfather, Wenzl Lanhaus, an administrator of the estate Chirlitz, was also master builder of the streets there. His activities in that field later influenced the theoretical work of Ernst Mach. Some sources give Mach's birthplace as Turas/Tuřany (now also part of Brno), the site of the Chirlitz registry-office. Peregrin Weiss baptized Ernst Mach into the Roman Catholic Church in Turas/Tuřany. Despite his Catholic background, he later became an atheist. Up to the age of 14, Mach received his education at home from his parents. He then entered a Gymnasium in Kroměříž ( ), where he studied for three years. In 1855 he became a student at the University of Vienna. There he studied physics and for one semester medical physiology, receiving his doctorate in physics in 1860 and his Habilitation the following year. His early work focused on the Doppler effect in optics and acoustics. In 1864 he took a job as Professor of Mathematics in Graz, having turned down the position of a chair in surgery at the University of Salzburg to do so, and in 1866 he was appointed as Professor of Physics. During that period, Mach continued his work in psycho-physics and in sensory perception. In 1867, he took the chair of Experimental Physics at the Charles University, Prague, where he stayed for 28 years before returning to Vienna.Mach's main contribution to physics involved his description and photographs of spark shock-waves and then ballistic shock-waves. He described how when a bullet or shell moved faster than the speed of sound, it created a compression of air in front it. Using schlieren photography, he and his son Ludwig were able to photograph the shadows of the invisible shock waves. During the early 1890s Ludwig was able to invent an interferometer which allowed for much clearer photographs. But Mach also made many contributions to psychology and physiology, including his anticipation of gestalt phenomena, his discovery of the oblique effect and of Mach bands, an inhibition-influenced type of visual illusion, and especially his discovery of a non-acoustic function of the inner ear which helps control human balance.Mach also became well known for his philosophy developed in close interplay with his science.  Mach defended a type of phenomenalism recognizing only sensations as real. This position seemed incompatible with the view of atoms and molecules as external, mind-independent things, and from about 1908 to 1911 Mach's reluctance to acknowledge the reality of atoms was criticized by Max Planck as being incompatible with physics. Some of Mach's criticisms of Newton's position on space and time influenced Einstein, but later Einstein realized that Mach was basically opposed to Newton's philosophy and concluded that his physical criticism was not sound. One of the best-known of Mach's ideas is the so-called "Mach principle," concerning the physical origin of inertia. This was never written down by Mach, but was given a graphic verbal form, attributed by Philipp Frank to Mach himself, as, "When the subway jerks, it's the fixed stars that throw you down." In 1898 Mach suffered from cardiac arrest and in 1901 retired from the University of Vienna and was appointed to the upper chamber of the Austrian parliament. On leaving Vienna in 1913 he moved to his son's home in Vaterstetten, near Munich, where he continued writing and corresponding until his death in 1916. His current living descendant is Marilyn vos Savant (her father was Joseph Mach).
Physics
Most of Mach's initial studies in the field of experimental physics concentrated on the interference, diffraction, polarization and refraction of light in different media under external influences. There followed his important explorations in the field of supersonic velocity. Mach's paper on this subject was published in 1877 and correctly describes the sound effects observed during the supersonic motion of a projectile. Mach deduced and experimentally confirmed the existence of a shock wave which has the form of a cone with the projectile at the apex. The ratio of the speed of projectile to the speed of sound v p /v s  is now called the Mach number. It plays a crucial role in aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. He also contributed to cosmology the hypothesis known as Mach's principle.
Philosophy of science
From 1895 to 1901, Mach held a newly created chair for "the history and philosophy of the inductive sciences" at the University of Vienna.   In his historico-philosophical studies, Mach developed a phenomenalistic philosophy of science which became influential in the 19th and 20th centuries. He originally saw scientific laws as summaries of experimental events, constructed for the purpose of making complex data comprehensible, but later emphasized mathematical functions as a more useful way to describe sensory appearances. Thus scientific laws while somewhat idealized have more to do with describing sensations than with reality as it exists beyond sensations.   Mach's positivism also influenced many Russian Marxists, such as Alexander Bogdanov (1873–1928). In 1908, Lenin wrote a philosophical work, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (published 1909), in which he criticized Machism and the views of "Russian Machists".In accordance with this philosophy, Mach opposed Ludwig Boltzmann and others who proposed an atomic theory of physics. Since one cannot observe things as small as atoms directly, and since no atomic model at the time was consistent, the atomic hypothesis seemed to Mach to be unwarranted, and perhaps not sufficiently "economical". Mach had a direct influence on the Vienna Circle philosophers and the school of logical positivism in general.Mach is attributed with a number of principles that distill his ideal of physical theorisation — what is now called "Machian physics":

It should be based entirely on directly observable phenomena (in line with his positivistic leanings) 
It should completely eschew absolute space and time in favor of relative motion Penrose, R. The Road to Reality, p753: "Mach’s principle asserts that
physics should be defined entirely in terms of the relation of one body to
another, and that the very notion of a background space should be
abandoned" 

Any phenomena that would seem attributable to absolute space and time  (e.g. inertia, and centrifugal force) should instead be seen as emerging from the large scale distribution of matter in the universe. 

The last is singled out, particularly by Albert Einstein as "the" Mach's principle. Einstein cited it as one of the three principles underlying general relativity. In 1930, he stated that "it is justified to consider Mach as the precursor of the general theory of relativity",  though Mach, before his death, would reject Einstein's theory. Einstein was aware that his theories did not fulfill all Mach's principles, and no subsequent theory has either, despite considerable effort.
Physiology
In 1873, independently of each other 
Hawkins, J.E. and Schacht, J. "The Emergence of Vestibular Science" (Part 8 of "Sketches of Otohistory") in "Audiology and Neurotology," April 2005.
 
Mach and the physiologist and physician  Josef Breuer discovered how the sense of balance (i.e., the perception of the head’s imbalance) functions, tracing its management by information which the brain receives from the movement of a fluid in the semicircular canals of the inner ear. That the sense of balance depended on the three semicircular canals was discovered in 1870 by the physiologist Friedrich Goltz, but Goltz didn't discover how the balance-sensing apparatus functioned.
PsychologyIn the area of sensory perception, psychologists remember Mach for the optical illusion called the Mach band.More clearly than anyone before (or even since) Mach  made the distinction between what he called physiological (specifically visual) and geometrical spaces.Mach's views on mediating structures inspired B. F. Skinner's strongly inductive position, which paralleled Mach's in the field of psychology. 
  
EponymsThe lunar crater Mach takes its name from Ernst Mach.  So does the visual illusion and the unit for the velocity of sound.
Mach's principal works in English

The Science of Mechanics (1883)
The Analysis of Sensations (1897)
Popular Scientific Lectures (1895)
The Principles of Physical Optics (1926)
Knowledge and Error (1976)
Principles of the Theory of Heat (1986)


See also


Mach disk
Mach's principle
Mach reflection
Mach–Zehnder interferometer
Visual space
Marilyn vos Savant


References 
Further reading

J. Kockelmans. Philosophy of science: the historical background. New York: The Free Press, 1968.
John T. Blackmore, "Ernst Mach – His Life, Work, an Influence", Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1972
John Blackmore (ed.), ."Ernst Mach – A Deeper Look", Dordrecht, 1992.
J. Blackmore, R. Itagaki and S. Tanaka (eds.): "Ernst Mach's Vienna – 1895–1930", Dordrecht, 2001
John T. Blackmore, Ryoichi Itagaki and Setsuko Tanaka (eds.):" Ernst Mach's Science",Tokai University Press, Kanagawa, 2006.
John T. Blackmore, Ryoichi Itagaki and Setsuko Tanaka, "Ernst Mach's Influence Spreads", Sentinel Open Press: Bethesda, 2009.
John T. Blackmore, Ryoichi Itagaki and Setsuko Tanaka, "Ernst Mach's Graz", 1864–1867", Sentinel Open Press, Behesda, 2010.
John T. Blackmore, Ryoichi Itagaki and Setsuko Tanaka, "Ernst Mach's Prague 1867–1895", Sentinel Open Press, Bethesda 2010
Erik C. Banks, Ernst Mach's World Elements, Kluwer (now Springer), Dordrecht, 203.
John Blackmore und Klaus Hentschel (Hrsg.) "Ernst Mach als Aussenseiter", [with select correspondence], Braumüller, Vienna 1985.
Rudolf Haller & Friedrich Stadler (Hrsg., "Ernst Mach – Werk und Wirkung", Hoelder-Pichler-Tempsky, Vienna, 1988.)
Klaus Hentschel: On Paul Feyerabend's version of `Mach's theory of research and its relation to Albert Einstein', Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 16 (1985): 387-394.
Klaus Hentschel: Die Korrespondenz Duhem-Mach: Zur 'Modellbeladenheit' von Wissenschaftsgeschichte', Annals of Science 45 (1988): 73-91 (with their complete correspondence).
D. Hoffmann und H. Laitko (Hrsg.), Ernst Mach -Studien und Dokumente..., Berlin, 1991.
V. Prosser and J. Folta (eds.), "Ernst Mach and the development of Physics – Conference Papers", Prague, 1991.
Joachim Thiele (Hrsg.), "Wissenschaftliche Kommunikation – Die Korrespondenz Ernst Machs", Hain, Kastellaun, 1978 (with select correspondence).
Jiri Prochazka: Ernst Mach: 1838–1916. Genealogie. /Vol. I/ Brno 2007.
Jiri Prochazka: Ernst Mach: 1838–1916. Genealogie. /Vol. II/ Brno 2009.
Jiri Prochazka: Ernst Mach: 1838–1916. Genealogie. /Vol.III/ Brno, Vienna 2O1O.


External links 
 
 

Various Ernst Mach links, compiled by Greg C Elvers
Klaus Hentschel: Mach, Ernst, in: Neue Deutsche Biographie 15 (1987), S. 605-609.
Works in german and english, in the Internet Archive
 
Short biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science
Vladimir Lenin: Materialism and Empirio-Criticism
Mach's math genealogy

 
 
DEFAULTSORT


















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Gedeon Burkhard
 
Gedeon Burkhard (born July 3, 1969) is a German film and television actor. Although he has appeared in numerous films and TV series in both Europe and the US, he is probably best recognised for his role as Alexander Brandtner in the Austrian/German television series Kommissar Rex (1998–2001), which has been aired on television in numerous countries around the world, or as Corporal Wilhelm Wicki in the 2009 film Inglourious Basterds,
Life and careerGedeon Burkhard was born in Munich, Germany, the son of German actress Elisabeth von Molo (then Burkhard) and Wolfgang Burkhard, a great-grandson of Alexander Moissi, a famous Italo-Austro-Albanian actor of the 20th century.  Gedeon was educated at a boarding school in England. He began his acting career in 1979 in the German TV film Tante Maria. His father, Wolfgang Burkhard, is his manager. During the 1990s, he lived in the U.S., working in several productions but without much recognition. In this period, Gedeon Burkhard got married in Las Vegas only to divorce 4 months later. After that, he lived in Vienna for Kommisar Rex for more than 5 years, before moving to Berlin for work reasons. Gedeon Burkhard was working in Cologne on the TV series Alarm für Cobra 11 as the detective Chris Ritter, until the end of his contract in November 2007. His character Chris Ritter had a heroic death. He then returned to Berlin, to be close to his daughter and to work in new projects. He said: "For the moment I will dedicate myself again fully to my artistic vagabond life in Berlin".  Burkhard appeared in the Quentin Tarantino movie Inglourious Basterds. Since February 2009, he has been shooting the film "Massel", made for German television. In 2011, he was in Rome, shooting an Italian mini TV series of 6 chapters "Caccia al Re - La Narcotici", with other Italian actor like Stefano Dionisi, Raffaella Rea and Laura Glavan, in which he plays a drug investigator, Daniele Piazza.In 2011, he competed in the Italian version of "Dancing with the Stars", accompanied by professional Italian dancer Samanta Togni, in which he danced with his "daughter" Laura Glavan. Gedeon Burkhard is in a relationship with a German woman, Anika Bormann.
Filmography

Tante Maria (1979) (TV)
Und ab geht die Post (1981) (TV)
Blut und Ehre: Jugend unter Hitler (aka Blood and Honor: Youth Under Hitler (USA)) (1982) (TV)
"Nordlichter: Geschichten zwischen Watt und Wellen" (1983) TV Series
Passagier - Welcome to Germany, Der (aka The Passenger - Welcome to Germany, aka Welcome to Germany (USA)) (1988)
"Fahnder, Der" : Hendriks Alleingang (1988) TV Episode
"Forsthaus Falkenau" :  Frühlingsföhn (1989) TV Episode (as Gedeon Burkhart) & Ein neuer Anfang (1989) TV Episode (as Gedeon Burkhart)
Zwei Frauen (aka Silence Like Glass (USA)) (1989)
Šípková Ruženka (aka Sleeping Beauty (Europe: English title)) (1989) .
"Sekt oder Selters" (1990) TV Series
"The New Adventures of Black Beauty" (1990) TV Series
"Náhrdelník" (aka The Necklace (Europe: English title)) (1992) TV Series
Kleine Haie (aka Acting It Out, aka Little Sharks) (1992)
Sommerliebe (1993) (TV)
Mein Mann ist mein Hobby (1993) (TV)
Abgeschminkt! (aka Making Up! (USA)) (1993)
"Piovra 7, La" (1994) (mini) TV Series
Affären (1994)
"Verliebt, verlobt, verheiratet" (1994) TV Series
"König, Der" : Tod eines Schmetterlings (1994) TV Episode
"Fall für zwei, Ein" : Kleiner Bruder (1995) TV Episode
Magenta (1996)
Wem gehört Tobias? (aka In the Wrong Hands (USA)) (1996)
"SOKO 5113" : Polterabend (1996) TV Episode
Polizeiruf 110 - Die Gazelle (1996) (TV)
2 Männer, 2 Frauen - 4 Probleme!? (aka Four for Venice, aka Two Women, Two Men (USA)) (1998)
The Brylcreem Boys (1998)
Gefährliche Lust - Ein Mann in Versuchung (1998) (TV)
"Kommissar Rex" (aka Inspector Rex (Australia), aka Rex: A Cop's Best Friend (UK)) (1998–2000)
Superfire (2002) (TV)
Zwei Affären und eine Hochzeit (2002) (TV)
We'll Meet Again (2002) (TV)
Yu (2003)
Bisschen Haushalt, Das (2003) (TV)
"Wunschbaum, Der" (2004) (mini) TV Series
Vater meines Sohnes, Der (2004) (TV)
Utta Danella - Eine Liebe in Venedig (2005) (TV)
Der Todestunnel (2004) (TV)
"SOKO Leipzig" : Die Moorleiche (2005) TV Episode
Goldene Zeiten (2006)Misha Hahn.
Der letzte Zug (2006) Henry Neumann.
Alarm für Cobra 11 (2006/2007) (TV) Chris Ritter.
Märzmelodie(2007)(movie)is Florian(lead)
Inglourious Basterds (2009) (USA movie) is Cpl. Wilhelm Wicki.
So ein Schlamassel(2009) German TV Film as Patrick Silberschatz.
La Narcotici (2009) Italian TV Series Chief Daniele Piazza (lead).
Bridges (2010) German animated short film-noir Captain Saul Bridges (lead).
Inga Lindström - Millionäre küsst man nicht (2010) German TV Film Tomas Lindberg (lead).
Ohne Gnade (2010) German movie. Ronzo (supporting role).
Wunderkinder (2010) German movie. Boris Brodsky (lead).


References 
External links

 

  
DEFAULTSORT






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Song Zheyuan
 
 
Sòng Zhéyuán (宋哲元) (October 30, 1885–April 5, 1940) was a Chinese general during the Chinese Civil War and Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945).
Biography

Early life and educationBorn in the village of Zhaohong, northwest of the seat of Leling County, Shandong, he was educated under his uncle from his mother's side, a teacher of a traditional Confucian private school in Yanshan County. At the age of 20 (1904) he began studying in the military institute founded by Lu Jianzhang at Beijing and had since become Lu's favorite. In 1912 the troops of Lu and Feng Yuxiang, now subordinates of Yuan Shikai, were regrouped and Feng had then been Song's superior.
Military careerIn 1917, a year after being appointed the head of 1st battalion of Feng's 2nd regiment, his battalion spearheaded the removal of Zhang Xun from his imperial restoration in 1917.  As part of the Guominjun he became Governor of Jehol Province in 1926.  Following the defeat of the Guominjun in the Anti–Fengtian War Feng Yuxiang participated in the Northern Expedition, Sòng assumed the Chairmanship of Shaanxi province in November 1927 and in April of the same year the head of 4th division under the II Corps of the National Revolutionary Army. Switching sides to the Kuomintang after the abortive coup d'état in 1930 of Feng against Chiang Kai-shek, his troops were designated as the 29th Army and garrisoned in southern Shanxi province where he was responsible for the frontiers of the Rehe and Chahar provinces against the Japanese in Manchukuo.
Chair of Chahar provinceSong was the chairman of Chahar province when Japan invaded the provinces in the end of year 1932. Though poorly equipped compared to the better armed Japanese, Song led the 29th army to resist the aggression in a war known as the Defense of the Great Wall (熱河長城之戰). Japanese troops then entered the suburbs of Beijing and Tianjin after the predictable victory. Song was relieved from his post but reinstalled as commander after the Ho-Umezu agreement.
Later yearsIn the Battle of Lugou Bridge, his 29th Army bore the brunt of the Japanese Guandong Army. His troops were halved after the defeat and chased by the Japanese along the Jinpu Railway into Shandong Province during the Beiping–Hankou Railway Operation. However Han Fuqu, chairman of the province and suspected for his clandestine Japanese liaison, forbade Song to retreat across the Yellow River resulting in the 29th Army being shattered at Shijiazhuang in December 1937 and January 1938. Remaining forces suffered various losses against the Imperial Japanese Army and were delegated to guerrilla combat after retreating into the mountainous regions at the borders of Henan and Shanxi province in February 1938.He soon suffered various illnesses and died at the age of 56 in Mianyang County, Sichuan province after several unsuccessful medical treatments in Guilin, Chongqing, and Chengdu.
See also

History of the Republic of China


References

张学良将军赠给宋哲元的抗日指挥刀
宋哲元与抗日雄狮二十九军

 
DEFAULTSORT







 
 
 
 
 
 
	Hermann Huppen
 
Hermann Huppen (born 17 July 1938) is a Belgian comic book artist.  He is better known under his pen-name Hermann. He is most famous for his post-apocalyptic comic  Jeremiah which was made into a television series.
Biography 
Hermann was born in 1938 in Bévercé (now a part of Malmedy) in Liège Province. De Weyer, Geert (2005). "Hermann". In België gestript, pp. 124-125. Tielt: Lannoo.  After studying to become a furniture maker and working as interior architect, Hermann made his debut as comic book artist in 1964 in the comics magazine Spirou with a four page story. Greg noticed his talent and offered him to work for his studio. In 1966, he began illustrating the Bernard Prince series written by Greg, published in the comic magazine Tintin periodical. In 1969, also in collaboration with Greg, he began the western series Comanche. This appeared at the same time as other western series such as Blueberry.Hermann began writing his own stories in 1977, starting the post-apocalyptic Jeremiah series, which is still produced today. In the same period, he also made three albums of Nick, inspired by Little Nemo in Slumberland, for Spirou.  In 1983 he began a new series, Les Tours de Bois-Maury, which is set in the Middle Ages and is less focused on action than his other works.Hermann has also created many non-series graphic novels sometimes together with his son Yves H. One of them, Lune de Guerre, with a story by Jean Van Hamme, was later filmed as The Wedding Party by Dominique Deruddere. Hermann is characterized by a realistic style and stories that are both somber and angry, with a sense of disillusion with regards to the human character in general, and current society more specifically. 
Selected bibliographyMost of these comics have been published in French and Dutch: other translations are noted in the "remarks" column.

Series Years Volumes Written by Editor Remarks 
Bernard Prince 1969–1980 14 Greg Le Lombard and Dargaud Translated into German;    Translated into Danish;    Translated into Serbian; Translated into Swedish  
Comanche 1972–1983 10 Greg Le Lombard and Dargaud Continued by Rouge for four more stories; Translated into Serbian 
Jugurtha 1975–1977 2 Vernal RTP, Le Lombard and Dargaud  
Jeremiah 1979- 31 Hermann Fleurus, Edi-3, Novedi, Hachette, and Dupuis Translated into Serbian; Volume 1 and 4 translated into English and published by Fantagraphics 1983 under the titles 'The Survivors - Talons of Blood' and 'The Survivors - The Eyes That Burned'. 'Jeremiah 13 - Strike' published by Catalan Communications 1990. Jeremiah - Gun in the water and Jeremiah - Mercenaries published by SAF Comics 2002 and 2003. 
Alerte aux pirates 1980 1 Yves Duval and Step Bédéscope  
Les Dalton 1980 1 Yves Duval Bédéscope  
Hey, Nick! Are you dreaming 1981–1983 3 Morphée Dupuis Translated into English by SAF Comics 2003 
Les Tours de Bois-Maury (The Towers of Bois-Maury) 1984–2006 14 Hermann Glénat Volume 12 written by his son Yves H.: translated into Danish, published in English by Titan Books 
Volume 13 also written by Yves H. 
Volumes 1 published in English by Titan Books 1984; Volumes 1 & 2 published in English by Titan Books 1989; Volumes 1-3 translated into English by Catalan Communications 1990 and Volumes 1 and 2 republished by SAF Comics in 2002 
Volumes 1 to 3 and 12 to 15 translated into Serbian 
Abominations 1988 1 Hermann Glénat Published in English in 1990 by Catalan Communications  
Missié Vandisandi 1991 1 Hermann Dupuis  
Sarajevo Tango 1995 1 Hermann Dupuis The first book Hermann made in direct color. 
Le secret des hommes-chiens 1995 1 Yves Huppen Dupuis First collaboration with his son Yves 
Caatinga 1997 1 Hermann Le Lombard  
Wild bill is Dead 1999 1 Hermann Dupuis Translated into English by SAF Comics 2003 
Liens de sang 2000 1 Yves H. Le Lombard Published in English by Dark Horse Comics  
Lune de guerre 2000 1 Jean Van Hamme Dupuis  
Manhattan Beach 1957 2002 1 Yves H. Le Lombard Translated into English by SAF Comics 2003 
Zhong Guo 2003 1 Yves H. Dupuis  
The girl from Ipanema 2005 1 Yves H. Le Lombard Translated to Danish 
Sur les traces de Dracula : Vlad l'empaleur 2006 1 Yves H. Casterman Translated to Danish; Translated into Serbian 
La vie exagérée de l'Homme Nylon 2007 1 Hans-Michael Kirstein Le Lombard  
Afrika 2007 1 Hermann Le Lombard Danish translation by Faraos Cigarer 
Le diable des sept mers 2008–2009 2 Yves H. Dupuis  
Une nuit de pleine lune 2011 1 Yves H. Glénat  

Awards

1973: Prix Saint-Michel, Belgium
1980: Prix Saint-Michel
1992: Best Long Comic Strip at the Haxtur Awards, Spain

- nominated for Best Drawing at the Haxtur Awards
1999: nominated for Best Drawing and Best Cover at the Haxtur Awards
2001: Best Drawing at the Haxtur Awards

- nominated for Best Short Comic Strip and Best Script at the Haxtur Awards
2002: Grand Prix Saint-Michel

- nominated for Best Short Comic Strip and Best Drawing at the Haxtur Awards
2003: nominated for the Audience Award and the Artwork Award at the Angoulême International Comics Festival, France
2005: nominated for the Audience Award at the Angoulême International Comics Festival
2006: nominated for Best Comic (French language) at the Prix Saint-Michel
2010: nominated for Best Artwork at the Prix Saint-Michel 


Sources 

Béra, Michel; Denni, Michel; and Mellot, Philippe (2002): "Trésors de la Bande Dessinée 2003-2004". Paris, Les éditions de l'amateur. ISBN 2-85917-357-9
Hermann publications in Spirou, Belgian Tintin, French Tintin, Circus / Vécu, BoDoï BDoubliées  
 

Footnotes
 
External links

Hermann Huppen official site
Hermann biography on Lambiek Comiclopedia
Hermann fan site

   
DEFAULTSORT





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Jean-François Champollion
 
 
 Jean-François Champollion (23 December 1790 – 4 March 1832) was a French classical scholar, philologist and orientalist, decipherer of the Egyptian hieroglyphs.Champollion published the first translation of the Rosetta Stone hieroglyphs in 1822, showing that the Egyptian writing system was a combination of phonetic and ideographic signs.
BiographyChampollion was born in Figeac, Lot, the last of seven children (two of whom had already died before he was born). He was raised in humble circumstances;  because his parents could not afford to send him to school, he was taught to read by his brother Jacques. Jacques, although studious and largely self-educated, did not have Jean-François' genius for language; however, he was talented at earning a living, and supported Jean-François for most of his life.   He lived with his brother in Grenoble for several years, and even as a child showed an extraordinary linguistic talent. By the age of 16 he had mastered a dozen languages and had read a paper before the Grenoble Academy concerning the Coptic language. By 20 he could also speak Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Amharic, Sanskrit, Avestan, Pahlavi, Arabic, Syriac, Chaldean, Persian and Ge'ez in addition to his native French.  In 1809, he became assistant-professor of History at Grenoble University. His interest in oriental languages, especially Coptic, led to his being entrusted with the task of deciphering the writing on the then recently-discovered Rosetta Stone, and he spent the years 1822–1824 on this task. His 1824 work Précis du système hiéroglyphique gave birth to the entire field of modern Egyptology. He also identified the importance of the Turin King List, and dated the Dendera zodiac to the Roman period. His interest in Egyptology was originally inspired by Napoleon's Egyptian Campaigns 1798–1801. Champollion was subsequently made Professor of Egyptology at the Collège de France. 
Egyptian hieroglyphsThomas Young was one of the first to attempt decipherment of the Egyptian hieroglyphs, basing his own work on the investigations of Swedish diplomat Åkerblad. Although he failed to fully decipher the script, Young was able to translate some of the text on the stone, leading the way for Champollion to begin his own investigations.In 1822, Champollion finally published the first correct translation of the hieroglyphs and the key to the Egyptian grammatical system. Young and all others praised this work.
Franco-Tuscan Expedition

In 1827 Ippolito Rosellini, considered the founder of Egyptology in Italy, went to Paris for a year in order to improve his knowledge of the method of decipherment proposed by Champollion. The two philologists decided to organize an expedition to Egypt to confirm the validity of the discovery. Headed by Champollion and assisted by Rosellini his first disciple and great friend, the mission was known as the Franco-Tuscan Expedition, and was made possible by the support of the grand-duke of Tuscany, Leopold II, and the King of France, Charles X.On 21 July 1828, with four members, they boarded the ship Eglé at Toulon and set sail for Egypt. They travelled upstream along the Nile and studied an exhaustive number of monuments and inscriptions. The expedition led to a posthumously-published extensive Monuments de l'Égypte et de la Nubie (1845). Unfortunately, Champollion's expedition was blemished by unchecked looting. Most notably, while studying the Valley of the Kings, he damaged KV17, the tomb of Seti I, by removing a wall panel of 2.26 x 1.05 m in a corridor while other elements were removed by his companion Rossellini or the German expedition of 1845. The scenes are now in the collections of the Louvre, the museums of Florence and Berlin. During his stay, the Khedive of Egypt, Muhammad Ali Pasha, offered the two obelisks standing at the entrance of Luxor Temple to France in 1829, but only one was transported to Paris where it now stands on the Place de la Concorde.Exhausted by his labours during and after his scientific expedition to Egypt, Champollion died of an apoplectic attack (stroke) in Paris in 1832 at the age of 41. He is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery.Certain portions of Champollion's works were edited by his elder brother, Jacques Joseph Champollion-Figeac; Jacques Joseph's son, Aimé-Louis (1812–1894), wrote a biography of the two brothers.
In popular cultureChampollion was portrayed by Elliot Cowan in the 2005 BBC docudrama Egypt.
Works

  ;
  ;
 
  ;
  ;
  ;
  ;
  ;
  ;
  ;
Others – Principes généraux de l'écriture sacrée, new edition with a preface by Christiane Ziegler, Institut d'Orient, 1984.


Musées Champollion

A museum devoted to Jean-François Champollion was created in his birthplace at Figeac in Lot.  It was inaugurated 19 December 1986 in the presence of President François Mitterrand and Jean Leclant, secrétaire perpétuel of the Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres.  After two years of building work and extension, the museum re-opened in 2007.  Besides Champollion's life and discoveries, the museum also recounts the history of writing.  The whole façade is covered in pictograms, from the original ideograms of the whole world.
The "*Maison Champollion" at Vif in Isère, formerly the property of Jean-François's brother.


Notes 
Further reading

 
 
 


External links 

Giants of Egyptology: Jean-François Champollion, 1790–1832
Key words: unlocking lost languages
BBC: Jean-François Champollion

  
 
DEFAULTSORT













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Bertha von Suttner
 
 
Bertha Felicitas Sophie Freifrau von Suttner (Baroness Bertha von Suttner, Gräfin (Countess) Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau; 9 June 1843 – 21 June 1914) was an Austrian novelist, radical (organizational) pacifist, and the first woman to be a Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
BiographySuttner was born in Prague, Bohemia, the daughter of an impoverished  Austrian Field Marshal, Franz-Josef Graf Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau, and wife Sophie von Körner, and governess to the wealthy Suttner family from 1873. She had an older brother, Arthur Franz Graf Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau. She became engaged to engineer and novelist Arthur Gundaccar Freiherr von Suttner (who died on 10 December 1902), but his family opposed the match, and she answered an advertisement from Alfred Nobel in 1876 to become his secretary-housekeeper at his Paris residence.  She only remained a week before returning to Vienna and secretly marrying Arthur on 12 June 1876.Suttner became a leading figure in the peace movement with the publication of her novel, Die Waffen nieder! ("Lay Down Your Arms!") in 1889 and founded an Austrian pacifist organization in 1891.  She gained international repute as editor of the international pacifist journal Die Waffen nieder!, named after her book, from 1892 to 1899.  Her pacifism was influenced by the writings of Immanuel Kant, Henry Thomas Buckle, Herbert Spencer, Charles Darwin and Leo Tolstoy (Tolstoy praised Die Waffen nieder!).
 Bertha von Suttner by Irwin Adams. The World Encyclopedia of Peace.Edited by Ervin László, Linus Pauling and Jong Youl Yoo. Oxford : Pergamon, 1986. ISBN 0-08-032685-4, (vol. 3, pp. 201–4).  Suttner was also a journalist, with one historian stating her work revealed her as "a most perceptive and adept political commentator".   Though her personal contact with Alfred Nobel had been brief, she corresponded with him until his death in 1896, and it is believed that she was a major influence in his decision to include a peace prize among those prizes provided in his will, which she won in 1905.
Commemoration on coins and stamps

Bertha von Suttner was recently selected as a main motif for a high value collectors' coin: the 2008 Europe Taler. The reverse shows important people in the history of Europe, including Bertha von Suttner.  Also depicted in the coin are Martin Luther (symbolising the transition from the Middle Ages to the modern period); Antonio Vivaldi (exemplifying the importance of European cultural life); and James Watt (representing the industrialization of Europe, inventor of the first steam engine in the 18th century).
She is depicted on the Austrian 2 euro coin, and was pictured on the old Austrian 1000 schilling bank note.
She was commemorated on a 2005 German postage stamp.


On film

Die Waffen nieder, by Holger Madsen and Carl Theodor Dreyer. Released by Nordisk Films Kompagni in 1914.  
"No Greater Love" ( ), a 1952 film  has Bertha as the main character.


Works

 


Notes 
See also 

List of pacifists
List of Austrians
List of Austrian writers
List of female Nobel laureates


External links

Nobel Entry
More Info from Nobel Winners
Another biography on Bertha von Suttner
2005 — the Bertha von Suttner Year
 
 
Online text of "Lay down Your Arms", archive.org
  (PDF of full review of Memoirs)
 

 
   
DEFAULTSORT























  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Peter Greenaway
 
 
Peter Greenaway, CBE (born 5 April 1942) is a British film director. His films are noted for the distinct influence of Renaissance and Baroque painting, and Flemish painting in particular. The scenic composition and illumination and the contrasts of costume and nudity, nature and architecture, furniture and people, sexual pleasure and painful death are common traits in his films.
Early lifeGreenaway was born in Newport, Monmouthshire, Wales,  to a teacher mother and a builder's merchant father.    Greenaway's family left South Wales when he was three years old (they had moved there originally to avoid the Blitz) and settled in Chingford, Essex, England. He attended Forest School in North-East London. At an early age Greenaway decided on becoming a painter. He became interested in European cinema, focusing first on the films of Ingmar Bergman, and then on the French nouvelle vague filmmakers such as Jean-Luc Godard and, most especially, Alain Resnais.
Career
1962-1999In 1962, Greenaway began studies at Walthamstow College of Art, where a fellow student was musician Ian Dury (later cast in The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover). Greenaway trained as a muralist for three years; he made his first film, Death of Sentiment, a churchyard furniture essay filmed in four large London cemeteries. In 1965, he joined the Central Office of Information (COI), working there fifteen years as a film editor and director. In that time he created a filmography of experimental films, starting with  Train (1966), footage of the last steam trains at Waterloo station, (situated behind the COI), edited to a musique concrète composition. Tree (1966), is a homage to the embattled tree growing in concrete outside the Royal Festival Hall on the South Bank in London. By the 1970s he was confident and ambitious and made Vertical Features Remake and A Walk Through H. The former is an examination of various arithmetical editing structures, and the latter is a journey through the maps of a fictitious country.In 1980, Greenaway delivered The Falls (his first feature-length film) – a mammoth, fantastical, absurdist encyclopedia of flight-associated material all relating to ninety-two victims of what is referred to as the Violent Unknown Event (VUE). In the 1980s, Greenaway's cinema flowered in his best-known films, The Draughtsman's Contract (1982), A Zed & Two Noughts (1985), The Belly of an Architect (1987), Drowning by Numbers (1988), and his most successful (and controversial) film, The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover (1989). Greenaway's most familiar musical collaborator during this period is composer Michael Nyman, who has scored several films.In 1989, he collaborated with artist Tom Phillips on a television serial A TV Dante, dramatising the first few cantos of Dante's Inferno. In the 1990s, he presented Prospero's Books (1991), the controversial The Baby of Mâcon (1993), The Pillow Book (1996), and 8½ Women (1999).In the early 1990s, Greenaway wrote ten opera libretti known as the Death of a Composer series, dealing with the commonalities of the deaths of ten composers from Anton Webern to John Lennon, however, the other composers are fictitious, and one is a character from  The Falls. In 1995, Louis Andriessen completed the sixth libretto, Rosa – A Horse Drama. He is currently professor of cinema studies at the European Graduate School in Saas-Fee, Switzerland.
2000 - presentGreenaway completed the artistically ambitious The Tulse Luper Suitcases, a multimedia project with innovative film techniques that resulted in three films. Later there were releases of two shorter features which rework the material of the first three films.He also contributed to Visions of Europe, a short film collection by different European Union directors; his British entry is The European Showerbath. Nightwatching and Rembrandt's J'Accuse two films on Rembrandt which were released in 2007 and 2008 respectively. Nightwatching is the first feature in the series "Dutch Masters", with the next project titled as "Goltzius and the Pelican Company". On 17 June 2005, Greenaway appeared for his first VJ performance during an art club evening in Amsterdam, Netherlands, with music by DJ Serge Dodwell (aka Radar), as a backdrop, ‘VJ’ Greenaway used for his set a special system consisting of a large plasma screen with laser controlled touchscreen to project the ninety-two Tulse Luper stories on the twelve screens of "Club 11", mixing the images live. This was later reprised at the Optronica festival, London.On 12 October 2007, he created the multimedia installation Peopling the Palaces at Venaria Reale at the Royal Palace of Venaria that will remain open for three years and that animate the Palace with 100 videoprojectors. 
'Nine Classical Paintings Revisited'In 2006, Greenaway began an ambitious series of digital video installations, Nine Classical Paintings Revisited, with his exploration of Rembrandt's Night Watch in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. On 30 June 2008, after much negotiation, Greenaway staged a one-night performance 'remixing' da Vinci's The Last Supper in the refectory of Santa Maria delle Grazie  in Milan to a select audience of dignitaries. The performance consisted of superimposing digital imagery and projections onto the painting with music from the composer Marco Robino.
 
File:Nachtwacht.jpg|NightWatch by Rembrandt
File:Paolo Veronese, The Wedding at Cana.JPG|The Wedding at Cana by Paolo Veronese (mid-16th century)
 Greenaway exhibited his digital exploration of The Wedding at Cana by Paolo Veronese as part of the 2009  Venice Biennial. An arts writer for the New York Times called it "possibly the best unmanned art history lecture you'll ever experience," while acknowledging that some viewers might respond to it as "mediocre art, Disneyfied kitsch or a flamboyant denigration of site-specific video installation." The 50-minute presentation, set to a soundtrack, incorporates closeup images of faces from the painting along with animated diagrams revealing compositional relations among the figures. These images are projected onto and around the replica of the painting that now stands at the original site, within the Palladian architecture of the Benedictine refectory on San Giorgio Maggiore. The soundtrack features music and imagined dialogue scripted by Greenaway for the 126 "wedding guests, servants, onlookers and wedding crashers" depicted in the painting, consisting of small talk and banal chatter that culminates in reaction to the miraculous transformation of water to wine, according to the Gospels the first miracle performed by Jesus. Picasso's Guernica, Seurat's Grande Jatte, works by Jackson Pollock and Claude Monet, Velázquez's Las Meninas and Michelangelo's The Last Judgment are possible series subjects. 
FilmsFeatures

The Falls (1980, 185 min)
The Draughtsman's Contract (1982, 103 min)
A Zed & Two Noughts (1985, 115 min)
The Belly of an Architect (1987, 120 min)
Drowning by Numbers (1988, 118 min)
The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover (1989, 124 min)
Prospero's Books (1991, 129 min)
The Baby of Mâcon (1993, 122 min)
The Pillow Book (1996, 126 min)
8½ Women (1999, 118 min)
The Tulse Luper Suitcases, Part 1: The Moab Story (2003, 127 min)
The Tulse Luper Suitcases, Part 2: Vaux to the Sea (2004, 108 min)
The Tulse Luper Suitcases, Part 3: From Sark to the Finish (2004, 120 min)
Nightwatching (2007, 134 min)
Goltzius and the Pelican Company (2012, 120 min)

Shorts

Death of Sentiment (1962, 8 min)
Tree (1966, 16 min)
Train (1966, 5 min)
Revolution (1967, 8 min)
5 Postcards from Capital Cities (1967, 35 min)
Intervals (1969, 7 min)
Erosion (1971, 27 min)
H Is for House (1973, 10 min)
Windows (1975, 4 min)
Water Wrackets (1975, 12 min)
Water (1975, 5 min)
Goole by Numbers (1976, 40 min)
Dear Phone (1978, 17 min)
Vertical Features Remake (1978, 45 min)
A Walk Through H: The Reincarnation of an Ornithologist (1978, 41 min)
1-100 (1978, 4 min)
Making a Splash (1984, 25 min)
Inside Rooms: 26 Bathrooms, London & Oxfordshire (1985, 26 min)
Hubert Bals Handshake (1989, 5 min)
Rosa (1992, 15 min)
Peter Greenaway (1995, 55 sec)  - segment of Lumière and Company 
The Bridge (1997, 12 min)
The Man in the Bath (2001, 7 min)
European Showerbath (2004, 5 min)  - segment of Visions of Europe 
Castle Amerongen (2011, 37 min)

Documentaries and mockumentaries

Eddie Kid (1978, 5 min)
Cut Above the Rest (1978, 5 min)
Zandra Rhodes (1979, 13 min)
Women Artists (1979, 5 min)
Leeds Castle (1979, 5 min)
Lacock Village (1980, 5 min)
Country Diary (1980, 5 min)
Terence Conran (1981, 15 min)
Four American Composers (1983, 220 min)
The Coastline (1983, 26 min)
Fear of Drowning (1988)
Rembrandt's J'Accuse (2008, 86min)

Television

Act of God (1980)
Death in the Seine (French TV, 1988)
A TV Dante (mini-series, 1989)
M Is for Man, Music, Mozart (1991)
A Walk Through Prospero's Library (1992)
Darwin (French TV, 1993)
The Death of a Composer: Rosa, a Horse Drama (1999, 90 mins)


Exhibitions

1991 The Physical Self, museum Boymans van Beuningen, Rotterdam
100 Objects to represent the World (1992) at the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna and the Hofburg Imperial Palace Vienna.
Stairs 1 Geneva (1995)
Flyga över vatten/Flying over water, Malmö Konsthall (16/9 2000 - 14/1 2001)
Peopling the Palaces at Venaria Reale, Palace of Venaria (2007)
Heavy Water, Chelouche Gallery, Tel Aviv (2011)


References 
External links 

Official website
  Greenaway. Faculty website at European Graduate School (Biography, filmography, articles and photos)
British Film Institute. Early Films
 
InFrame.tv Interview on Leonardo's Last Supper
 
Manu Luksch. Interview - The Medium is the Message. Telepolis. 13 February 1997
Dana Linssen. Video interview May 2006. 39min.
Peter Greenaway at the National Portrait Gallery, London
Chris Gordon. Interview - An eye for optical theory, The St. Petersburg Times, Russia. 21 June 2012

 
  
DEFAULTSORT











 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	DeWitt Clinton
 
 
 
DeWitt Clinton (March 2, 1769 February 11, 1828) was an early American politician and naturalist who served as United States Senator and the sixth Governor of New York. In this last capacity he was largely responsible for the construction of the Erie Canal. Edwin G. Burrows "Little Short of Madness," American Heritage, Winter 2010.  Clinton was the leader of New York's People’s Party, and was a major rival of Martin van Buren, who was attorney general of New York during Clinton's governorship. According to Daniel Walker Howe (2007) Clinton is an authentic but largely forgotten hero of American democracy. Howe explains, "The infrastructure he worked to create would transform American life, enhancing economic opportunity, political participation, and intellectual awareness." 
Early life and political careerDeWitt Clinton was the second son born to James Clinton and his wife Mary DeWitt (1737–1795, aunt of Simeon De Witt), and was educated at King's College, what is now Columbia University. He became the secretary to his uncle, George Clinton, who was then governor of New York. Soon after he became a member of the Democratic-Republican Party. He was a member of the New York State Assembly in 1798, and of the New York State Senate from the Southern District from 1798 to 1802, and from 1806 to 1811. He was a delegate to the New York State Constitutional Convention in 1801. He was a member of the Council of Appointments in 1801–1802 and 1806–1807. He won the by-election for U.S. Senator from New York after the resignation of John Armstrong, Jr. and served from February 23, 1802, to November 4, 1803. He resigned, unhappy with living conditions in newly built Washington, DC, and was appointed Mayor of New York City. He served as Mayor in 1803–1807, 1808–1810, and 1811–1815. While serving as Mayor, he organized the Historical Society of New York in 1804 and was its president. He also helped re-organizing the American Academy of the Fine Arts in 1808 served as its president between 1813 and 1817. He was Regent of the University of New York from 1808 to 1825.He was married twice. On February 13, 1796, he married Maria Franklin, daughter of the prominent New York Quaker merchant, Walter Franklin. By her he had ten children, four sons and three daughters surviving at the time of her death in 1818. On May 8, 1819, he married Catharine Jones, daughter of a New York physician, Thomas Jones; she outlived her husband. His son, George William Clinton (1807–1885), served as Mayor of Buffalo, New York, 1842–1843.
Later political career and governorshipFrom 1810 to 1824, he was a member of the Erie Canal Commission. He was among the first members, appointed in 1810, who projected and surveyed the route to be taken. After 1816, he became the driving force during the construction of the canal. 

In 1811, the death of John Broome left a vacancy in the office of Lieutenant Governor of New York. In a special election, Clinton defeated the Federalist Nicholas Fish and the Tammany Hall candidate Marinus Willett, to become Lieutenant Governor under Governor Daniel D. Tompkins until the end of the term in June 1813.In 1812, Clinton ran for President of the United States as candidate for both the Federalist Party and a small group of anti-war Democratic-Republicans. In the close Election of 1812, Clinton was defeated by President Madison; Clinton received 89 electoral votes to James Madison's 128. It was the strongest showing of any Federalist candidate for the Presidency since 1800, and the change of the votes of one or two states would have given Clinton the victory. After the resignation of Governor Tompkins, who had been elected Vice President, he won a special gubernatorial election in which he was the only candidate. 1,479 votes were cast for Peter Buell Porter – against Clinton's 43,310 – because the Tammany organization, which fiercely hated Clinton, had printed ballots with Porter's name and distributed among the Tammany followers in New York City. On July 1, 1817, Clinton took office as Governor of New York. He was re-elected in 1820, defeating the sitting Vice President Tompkins in a narrow race – DeWitt Clinton 47,447 votes, Tompkins 45,900 – and served until December 31, 1822.During his second term, the New York State Constitutional Convention of 1821 shortened the gubernatorial term to two years, and moved the beginning of the term from July 1 to January 1, actually cutting off the last 6 months of the 3-year-term he had been elected to. Also the gubernatorial election was moved from April to November, but Clinton was not renominated by his party to run for re-election in November 1822. Even so, he still kept his post as President of the Erie Canal Commission. In April 1824, a majority of his political enemies, the Bucktails, voted in the New York State Legislature for his removal from the Canal Commission. This caused such a wave of indignation among the electorate, that he was nominated for Governor by the "People's Party", and was re-elected governor, against the official candidate of the Democratic-Republican Party, fellow canal commissioner Samuel Young. He served another two terms until his sudden death in office. Clinton was a Freemason, and in 1806, he was elected Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of New York. He retained this title until 1819. The Grand Lodge of New York has established The DeWitt Clinton Award. The Award recognizes distinguished or outstanding community service by non-Masonic organizations or individuals whose actions exemplify a shared concern for the well-being of Mankind and a belief in the worldwide brotherhood of Man.  He was originally buried at the Clinton Cemetery in Little Britain, New York, later he was re-interred at the Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York. Clinton was able to accomplish many things as a leader in civic and state affairs, such as improving the New York public school system, encouraging steam navigation, and modifying the laws governing criminals and debtors. The 1831 DeWitt Clinton locomotive was named in his honor. The community of Whitestone, New York, was for several decades after his death known as Clintonville, but reverted to its traditional name; however, the governor is memorialized to this day by Clintonville street, a major local road.
Erie Canal 
While governor, Clinton was largely responsible for the construction of the Erie Canal. He was persuaded by Canal proponent Jesse Hawley to support construction of a canal from the eastern shore of Lake Erie to the upper Hudson River. Many thought the project was impracticable, and opponents mocked it as "DeWitt's Ditch". John Steele Gordon "10 Moments That Made American Business," American Heritage, February/March 2007.  But in 1817, he got the legislature to appropriate $7,000,000 for construction. When the Canal was finished in 1825, Governor Clinton opened it, sailing in the packet boat Seneca Chief along the Canal into Buffalo. After sailing from the mouth of Lake Erie to New York City he emptied two casks of water from Lake Erie into New York Harbor, celebrating the first connection of waters from East to West. The Canal was an immense success, carrying huge amounts of passenger and freight traffic. It provided cheap transportation from the Atlantic to the West, drawing traffic to New York state and New York City, which became the most important state and city in America.
LegacyList of places named for DeWitt Clinton:
Towns

Clinton, Arkansas
DeWitt, Arkansas
Clinton, Connecticut
Clinton, Illinois which is located in DeWitt County
Clinton, Indiana
Clinton, Iowa
Clinton, Louisiana
Clinton, Massachusetts
Clinton, Mississippi
Clinton, Missouri
Clinton, New Jersey
Port Clinton, Pennsylvania
DeWitt, Illinois, which is located in DeWitt County

DeWitt, Iowa which is located in Clinton County
DeWitt, Michigan which is located in Clinton County
DeWitt, New York


Counties

Clinton County, Iowa, the county seat of which is Clinton, Iowa
Clinton County, Kentucky
Clinton County, Michigan
Clinton County, Pennsylvania
Clinton County, Illinois
DeWitt County, Illinois, the county seat of which is Clinton, Illinois

(Note that the naming of two counties in Illinois after Clinton is the only instance in the United States of two counties in the same state being named after the same person.)
Non-geographic namesakes

DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York
An engraved portrait of Clinton appeared on the Legal Tender (United States Note) issue of 1880 in the $1000.00 denomination. An illustrated example can be found on the website of Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's "American Currency Exhibit".
Dewitt Clinton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois
Dewitt Clinton Elementary School, Lockport, New York
Dewitt Clinton Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan
Ted DeWitt Clinton, a character from the animated series Daria.
DeWitt Clinton Park, Manhattan, New York City. The neighborhood around it, Hell's Kitchen, has also become known as Clinton, or the Special Clinton District (a City Government preservation zone) in recent years.
East Asian plant Clintonia.


See also

List of places named for DeWitt Clinton


Notes 
External material
Sources

Congress Bio
Political Graveyard
Bio at Erie Canal
NY History with Lt. Gov. election in 1811
NY History with Presidential Election result 1812
NY History with Gov. election result 1817
DeWitt genealogy, at Mr. Jumbo


References

Bobbe, Dorothie. DeWitt Clinton (1933)
Cornog, Evan. The Birth of Empire: Dewitt Clinton and the American Experience, 1769–1828 (1998) Oxford University Press, (2000) online
Hanyan, Craig and Mary L. De Witt Clinton and the Rise of the People's Men McGill-Queens University Press, (1996) online
 
Sloan, De Villo. The Crimsoned Hills of Onondaga. Amherst, NY: Cambria Press, 2008   Senator box}}
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
DEFAULTSORT





















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Roald Dahl
 
 
 Roald Dahl ( ,   ; 13 September 1916 23 November 1990) was a British novelist, short story writer, poet, fighter pilot and screenwriter.Born in Wales to Norwegian parents, he served in the British Royal Air Force during World War II, in which he became a flying ace and intelligence officer, rising to the rank of Wing Commander. Dahl rose to prominence in the 1940s, with works for both children and adults, and became one of the world's best-selling authors.   He has been referred to as "one of the greatest storytellers for children of the 20th century".  In 2008 The Times placed Dahl 16th on its list of "The 50 greatest British writers since 1945". The 50 greatest British writers since 1945. The Times. 5 January 2008. Retrieved on 1 February 2010.  His short stories are known for their unexpected endings, and his children's books for their unsentimental, often very dark humour.Some of his notable works include James and the Giant Peach, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Matilda, The Witches, Fantastic Mr Fox, The Twits, George's Marvellous Medicine and The BFG.
Early lifeRoald Dahl was born at Villa Marie, Fairwater Road in Llandaff, Cardiff, Wales, in 1916, to Norwegian parents, Harald Dahl and Sofie Magdalene Dahl (née Hesselberg).  Dahl's father had emigrated to the UK from Sarpsborg, Norway, and settled in Cardiff in the 1880s. His mother came over and married his father in 1911. Dahl was named after the polar explorer Roald Amundsen, a national hero in Norway at the time. He spoke Norwegian at home with his parents and his sisters Astri, Alfhild, and Else. Dahl and his sisters were christened at the Norwegian Church, Cardiff, where their parents worshipped. In 1920, when Dahl was three years old, his seven-year-old sister, Astri, died from appendicitis. Weeks later, his father died of pneumonia at the age of 57 while on a fishing trip in the Antarctic. With the option of returning to Norway to live with relatives, Dahl's mother decided to remain in Wales because Harald had wished to have their children educated in British schools, which he considered the world's best. Dahl first attended The Cathedral School, Llandaff. At the age of eight, he and four of his friends (one named Thwaites) were caned by the headmaster after putting a dead mouse in a jar of gobstoppers at the local sweet shop,  which was owned by a "mean and loathsome" old woman called Mrs Pratchett.  This was known amongst the five boys as the "Great Mouse Plot of 1924". Thereafter, he transferred to a boarding school in England: Saint Peter's in Weston-super-Mare. Roald's parents had wanted him to be educated at an English public school and, because of a then regular ferry link across the Bristol Channel, this proved to be the nearest. His time at Saint Peter's was an unpleasant experience for him. He was very homesick and wrote to his mother every week but never revealed to her his unhappiness, being under the pressure of school censorship. Only after her death in 1967 did he find out that she had saved every single one of his letters, in small bundles held together with green tape.  Dahl wrote about his time at St. Peter's in his autobiography Boy: Tales of Childhood. From 1929, he attended Repton School in Derbyshire, where, according to Boy: Tales of Childhood, a friend named Michael was viciously caned by headmaster Geoffrey Fisher, who later became the Archbishop of Canterbury and went on to crown Queen Elizabeth II in 1953. (However, according to Dahl's biographer Jeremy Treglown,  the caning took place in May 1933, a year after Fisher had left Repton. The headmaster concerned was in fact J.T. Christie, Fisher's successor.) This caused Dahl to "have doubts about religion and even about God".    He was never seen as a particularly talented writer in his school years, with one of his English teachers writing in his school report "I have never met anybody who so persistently writes words meaning the exact opposite of what is intended."  Dahl was exceptionally tall, reaching   in adult life.  He excelled at sports, being made captain of the school fives and squash teams, and also playing for the football team.  As well as having a passion for literature, he also developed an interest in photography  and often carried a camera with him. During his years at Repton, Cadbury, the chocolate company, would occasionally send boxes of new chocolates to the school to be tested by the pupils. Dahl apparently used to dream of inventing a new chocolate bar that would win the praise of Mr. Cadbury himself; and this proved the inspiration for him to write his third book for children, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (1964), and to include references to chocolate in other books for children.   Throughout his childhood and adolescent years, Dahl spent some of his summer holidays with his mother's family in Norway. His childhood and first job selling kerosene in Midsomer Norton and surrounding villages in Somerset, south West England are subjects in Boy: Tales of Childhood.  The main child character in his 1983 book The Witches is a British boy of Norwegian descent, whose grandmother is still living in Norway. After finishing his schooling, he hiked through Newfoundland with the Public Schools' Exploring Society (now known as BSES Expeditions).  In July 1934, Dahl joined the Shell Petroleum Company. Following two years of training in the United Kingdom, he was transferred to first Mombasa, Kenya, then to Dar-es-Salaam, Tanganyika (now Tanzania). Along with the only two other Shell employees in the entire territory, he lived in luxury in the Shell House outside Dar-es-Salaam, with a cook and personal servants. While out on assignments supplying oil to customers across Tanganyika, he encountered black mambas and lions, amongst other wildlife. 
Fighter ace and intelligence officer In August 1939, as World War II loomed, plans were made to round up the hundreds of Germans in Dar-es-Salaam. Dahl was made an officer in the King's African Rifles, commanding a platoon of Askaris, indigenous troops serving in the colonial army. In November 1939, Dahl joined the Royal Air Force as an Aircraftman. After a   car journey from Dar-es-Salaam to Nairobi, he was accepted for flight training with 16 other men, of whom  only two others survived the war. With seven hours and 40 minutes experience in a De Havilland Tiger Moth, he flew solo;  Dahl enjoyed watching the wildlife of Kenya during his flights. He continued to advanced flying training in Iraq, at RAF Habbaniya,   west of Baghdad. He was promoted to Leading Aircraftman on 24 August 1940.  Following six months' training on Hawker Harts, Dahl was made an Acting Pilot Officer.He was assigned to No. 80 Squadron RAF, flying obsolete Gloster Gladiators, the last biplane fighter aircraft used by the RAF. Dahl was surprised to find that he would not receive any specialised training in aerial combat, or in flying Gladiators. On 19 September 1940, Dahl was ordered to fly his Gladiator from Abu Sueir in Egypt, on to Amiriya to refuel, and again to Fouka in Libya for a second refuelling. From there he would fly to 80 Squadron's forward airstrip   south of Mersa Matruh. On the final leg, he could not find the airstrip and, running low on fuel and with night approaching, he was forced to attempt a landing in the desert.  The undercarriage hit a boulder and the aircraft crashed, fracturing his skull, smashing his nose and temporarily blinding him. Alan Warren (1988) Roald Dahl pp.12, 87. Starmont House, 1988  He managed to drag himself away from the blazing wreckage and passed out. Later, he wrote about the crash for his first published work. Dahl was rescued and taken to a first-aid post in Mersa Matruh, where he regained consciousness, but not his sight, and was then taken by train to the Royal Navy hospital in Alexandria. There he fell in and out of love with a nurse, Mary Welland. An RAF inquiry into the crash revealed that the location to which he had been told to fly was completely wrong, and he had mistakenly been sent instead to the no man's land between the Allied and Italian forces.   In February 1941, Dahl was discharged from hospital and passed fully fit for flying duties. By this time, 80 Squadron had been transferred to the Greek campaign and based at Eleusina, near Athens. The squadron was now equipped with Hawker Hurricanes. Dahl flew a replacement Hurricane across the Mediterranean Sea in April 1941, after seven hours flying Hurricanes. By this stage in the Greek campaign, the RAF had only 18 combat aircraft in Greece: 14 Hurricanes and four Bristol Blenheim light bombers. Dahl saw his first aerial combat on 15 April 1941, while flying alone over the city of Chalcis. He attacked six Junkers Ju-88s that were bombing ships and shot one down. On 16 April in another air battle, he shot down another Ju-88. On 20 April 1941, Dahl took part in the "Battle of Athens", alongside the highest-scoring British Commonwealth ace of World War II, Pat Pattle and Dahl's friend David Coke. Of 12 Hurricanes involved, five were shot down and four of their pilots killed, including Pattle. Greek observers on the ground counted 22 German aircraft downed, but because of the confusion of the aerial engagement, none of the pilots knew which plane they had shot down. Dahl described it as "an endless blur of enemy fighters whizzing towards me from every side". In May, as the Germans were pressing on Athens, Dahl was evacuated to Egypt. His squadron was reassembled in Haifa. From there, Dahl flew sorties every day for a period of four weeks, shooting down a Vichy French Air Force Potez 63 on 8 June and another Ju-88 on 15 June, but he then began to get severe headaches that caused him to black out. He was invalided home to Britain. Though at this time Dahl was only a Pilot Officer on probation, in September 1941 he was simultaneously confirmed as a Pilot Officer and promoted to war substantive Flying Officer. Dahl began writing in 1942, after he was transferred to Washington, D.C. as Assistant Air Attaché. His first published work, in 1 August 1942 issue of The Saturday Evening Post, was "Shot Down Over Libya" which described the crash of his Gloster Gladiator. C. S. Forester had asked Dahl to write down some RAF anecdotes so that he could shape them into a story. After Forester read what Dahl had given him, he decided to publish the story exactly as Dahl had written it. The original title of the article was "A Piece of Cake" but the title was changed to sound more dramatic, despite the fact that he was not actually shot down. Dahl was promoted to Flight Lieutenant in August 1942.  During the war, Forester worked for the British Information Service and was writing propaganda for the Allied cause, mainly for American consumption.  This work introduced Dahl to espionage and the activities of the Canadian spymaster William Stephenson, known by the codename "Intrepid". During the war, Dahl supplied intelligence from Washington to Stephenson and his organisation known as British Security Coordination, which was part of MI6. He was revealed in the 1980s to have been serving to help promote Britain's interests and message in the United States and to combat the "America First" movement, working with such other well-known officers as Ian Fleming and David Ogilvy. The book "The Irregulars" (by Jennet Conant, Simon and Schuster 2008) describes this era of Dahl's life and those with whom he worked.  Dahl was once sent back to Britain by British Embassy officials, supposedly for misconduct – "I got booted out by the big boys," he said. Stephenson promptly sent him back to Washington—with a promotion to Wing Commander.  Towards the end of the war, Dahl wrote some of the history of the secret organisation and he and Stephenson remained friends for decades after the war. Upon the war's conclusion, Dahl held the rank of a temporary Wing Commander (substantive Flight Lieutenant). Owing to his accident in 1940 having left him with excruciating headaches while flying, in August 1946 he was invalided out of the RAF. He left the service with the substantive rank of Squadron Leader.  His record of five aerial victories, qualifying him as a flying ace, has been confirmed by post-war research and cross-referenced in Axis records, although it is most likely that he scored more than that during 20 April 1941 when 22 German aircraft were shot down. 
Post-war life
Dahl married American actress Patricia Neal on 2 July 1953 at Trinity Church in New York City. Their marriage lasted for 30 years and they had five children: Olivia, Tessa, Theo, Ophelia and Lucy. On 5 December 1960, four-month-old Theo Dahl was severely injured when his baby carriage was struck by a taxicab in New York City. For a time, he suffered from hydrocephalus and, as a result, his father became involved in the development of what became known as the "Wade-Dahl-Till" (or WDT) valve, a device to alleviate the condition.    In November 1962, Olivia Dahl died of measles encephalitis at age seven. Dahl subsequently became a proponent of immunisation  and dedicated his 1982 book The BFG to his daughter. In 1965, wife Patricia Neal suffered three burst cerebral aneurysms while pregnant with their fifth child, Lucy; Dahl took control of her rehabilitation and she eventually re-learned to talk and walk, and even returned to her acting career,    an episode in their lives which was dramatised in the film The Patricia Neal Story, in which the couple were played by Glenda Jackson and Dirk Bogarde. Dahl married Felicity "Liccy" Crosland at Brixton Town Hall, South London, following a divorce from Neal in 1983. Dahl and Crosland had previously been in a relationship.  According to biographer Donald Sturrock, Liccy gave up her job and moved into 'Gipsy House', Great Missenden in Buckinghamshire, which had been Dahl's home since 1954. In 1983 Dahl reviewed Tony Clifton's God Cried, a picture book about the 1982 Lebanon War that depicted Israelis killing thousands of Beirut inhabitants by bombing civilian targets.  Dahl's review stated that the book would make readers "violently anti-Israeli", writing, "I am not anti-Semitic. I am anti-Israel."  Dahl told a reporter in 1983, "There’s a trait in the Jewish character that does provoke animosity ... I mean there is always a reason why anti-anything crops up anywhere; even a stinker like Hitler didn’t just pick on them for no reason." Roald Dahl: A biography, Jeremy Treglown (Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1994), pp. 255–256.  Dahl maintained friendships with a number of Jews, including philosopher Isaiah Berlin, who said, "I thought he might say anything. Could have been pro-Arab or pro-Jew. There was no consistent line. He was a man who followed whims, which meant he would blow up in one direction, so to speak."   In the 1986 New Years Honours List, Dahl was offered the Order of the British Empire (OBE), but turned it down, purportedly because he wanted a knighthood so that his wife would be Lady Dahl.   Dahl is the father of author Tessa Dahl and grandfather of author, cookbook writer and former model Sophie Dahl (after whom Sophie in The BFG is named.) 
Death and legacy
Roald Dahl died on 23 November 1990, at the age of 74 of a blood disease, myelodysplastic syndrome, in Oxford,  and was buried in the cemetery at St Peter and St Paul's Church in Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, England.  According to his granddaughter, the family gave him a "sort of Viking funeral". He was buried with his snooker cues, some very good burgundy, chocolates, HB pencils and a power saw. In his honour, the Roald Dahl Children's Gallery was opened in November 1996, at the Buckinghamshire County Museum in nearby Aylesbury.  In 2002, one of Cardiff Bay's modern landmarks, the historic Oval Basin plaza, was re-christened "Roald Dahl Plass". "Plass" means "place" or "square" in Norwegian, referring to the acclaimed late writer's Norwegian roots. There have also been calls from the public for a permanent statue of him to be erected in the city. Dahl's charitable commitments in the fields of neurology, haematology and literacy have been continued by his widow since his death, through Roald Dahl's Marvellous Children's Charity, formerly known as the Roald Dahl Foundation.   In June 2005, the Roald Dahl Museum and Story Centre opened in Great Missenden to celebrate the work of Roald Dahl and advance his work in literacy education. David Hurst (20 June 2005) "Roald Dahl's fantasy factory". The Daily Mail. Retrieved 3 June 2012  In 2008, the UK charity Booktrust and Children's Laureate Michael Rosen inaugurated The Roald Dahl Funny Prize, an annual award to authors of humorous children's fiction.   On 14 September 2009 (the day after what would have been Dahl's 93rd birthday) the first blue plaque in his honour was unveiled in Llandaff, Cardiff, Wales.  Rather than commemorating his place of birth, however, the plaque was erected on the wall of the former sweet shop (and site of "The Great Mouse Plot of 1924") that features in the first part of his autobiography Boy. It was unveiled by his widow Felicity and son Theo.    The anniversary of Dahl's birthday on 13 September is celebrated as "Roald Dahl Day" in Africa, the United Kingdom and Latin America. Roald Dahl Day expands into full month of special treats The Guardian'.' Retrieved 1 May 2011.   In honour of Roald Dahl, Gibraltar Post issued a set of four stamps in 2010 featuring Quentin Blake's original illustrations for four of the children's books written by Dahl during his long career; The BFG, The Twits, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Matilda.  A set of six stamps was issued by Royal Mail in 2012, featuring Quentin Blake's illustrations for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, The Twits, The Witches, Matilda, Fantastic Mr Fox, James and the Giant Peach.    Dahl's influence has extended beyond literary figures, and he connected with film director Tim Burton with his "mixture of light and darkness, and not speaking down to kids, and the kind of politically incorrect humour that kids get".  Actress Scarlett Johansson named Fantastic Mr. Fox as one of the five books that made a difference to her.  Regarded as "one of the greatest storytellers for children of the 20th century", Once upon a time, there was a man who liked to make up stories ... The Independent (Sunday, 12 December 2010)  Dahl was listed as one of the greatest British writers since 1945.  He ranks amongst the world's best-selling fiction authors with sales estimated at over 100 million, Britain celebrates first Roald Dahl Day msnbc: "Dahl's books, many of them darkly comic and featuring villainous adult enemies of the child characters, have sold over 100 million copies." (13 September 2006)  Fans gather for Dahl celebration BBC News: "Exhibitions and children's reading campaigns are being held to commemorate the life of Dahl, who died in 1990 and has sold more than 100 million books." (13 September 2006)  and his books have been published in almost 50 languages.  In 2003, the UK survey entitled The Big Read carried out by the BBC in order to find the "nation's best loved novel" of all time, four of Dahl's books were named in the Top 100, with only works by Charles Dickens and Terry Pratchett featuring more.  In a 2006 list for the Royal Society of Literature, author J. K. Rowling named Charlie and the Chocolate Factory among her top ten books every child should read.   
Writing
Dahl's first published work, inspired by a meeting with C. S. Forester, was "A Piece Of Cake" on 1 August 1942. The story, about his wartime adventures, was bought by The Saturday Evening Post for US$1000 (a substantial sum in 1942) and published under the title "Shot Down Over Libya". His first children's book was The Gremlins, about mischievous little creatures that were part of RAF folklore. Donald, Graeme Sticklers, Sideburns & Bikinis: The Military Origins of Everyday Words and Phrases Osprey Publishing, 2008  All the RAF pilots blamed the gremlins for all the problems with the plane. The book, which First Lady of the US Eleanor Roosevelt read to her grandchildren,  was commissioned by Walt Disney for a film that was never made, and published in 1943.  Dahl went on to create some of the best-loved children's stories of the 20th century, such as Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Matilda, James and the Giant Peach, The Witches, Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator, The BFG, George's Marvellous Medicine and Fantastic Mr Fox.Dahl also had a successful parallel career as the writer of macabre adult short stories, usually with a dark sense of humour and a surprise ending.  The Mystery Writers of America presented Dahl with three Edgar Awards for his work, and many were originally written for American magazines such as Collier's (The Collector's Item was Colliers Star Story of the week for 4 September 1948), Ladies Home Journal, Harper's, Playboy and The New Yorker. Works such as Kiss Kiss subsequently collected Dahl's stories into anthologies, gaining worldwide acclaim. Dahl wrote more than 60 short stories; they have appeared in numerous collections, some only being published in book form after his death (See List of Roald Dahl short stories). His three Edgar Awards were given for: in 1954, the collection Someone Like You; in 1959, the story "The Landlady"; and in 1980, the episode of Tales of the Unexpected based on "Skin". Andrew Maunder The Facts On File companion to the British short story Infobase Publishing, 2007 
One of his more famous adult stories, "The Smoker" (also known as "Man From the South"), was filmed twice as both 1960 and 1985 episodes of Alfred Hitchcock Presents, and also adapted into Quentin Tarantino's segment of the 1995 film Four Rooms.  This oft-anthologised classic concerns a man in Jamaica who wagers with visitors in an attempt to claim the fingers from their hands. The 1960 Hitchcock version stars Steve McQueen and Peter Lorre. James Mottram The Sundance kids: how the mavericks took back Hollywood Macmillan, 2006 Dahl acquired a traditional Romanichal Gypsy wagon in the 1960s, and the family used it as a playhouse for his children at home in Great Missenden. He later used the vardo as a writing room, where he wrote Danny, the Champion of the World in 1975.  Dahl incorporated a Gypsy wagon into the main plot of the book, where the young English boy, Danny, and his father, William (played by Jeremy Irons in the film adaptation) live in a Gypsy caravan.  Many local scenes and characters in Great Missenden inspired Dahl's stories. His short story collection Tales of the Unexpected was adapted to a successful TV series of the same name, beginning with "Man From the South". The Facts On File companion to the British short story p.417.  When the stock of Dahl's own original stories was exhausted, the series continued by adapting stories by authors that were written in Dahl's style, including the writers John Collier and Stanley Ellin. A number of his short stories are supposed to be extracts from the diary of his (fictional) Uncle Oswald, a rich gentleman whose sexual exploits form the subject of these stories.  In his novel My Uncle Oswald, the uncle engages a temptress to seduce 20th century geniuses and royalty with a love potion secretly added to chocolate truffles made by Dahl's favourite chocolate shop, Prestat of Piccadilly, London. Darrell Schweitzer (1985) Discovering modern horror fiction, Volume 2. Wildside Press LLC, 1985 Memories with Food at Gipsy House, written with his wife Felicity and published posthumously in 1991, was a mixture of recipes, family reminiscences and Dahl's musings on favourite subjects such as chocolate, onions and claret. Sally Williams (12 September 2006) A plateful of Dahl The Telegraph'.' Retrieved 4 January 2011.  
Children's fictionDahl's children's works are usually told from the point of view of a child. They typically involve adult villains who hate and mistreat children, and feature at least one "good" adult to counteract the villain(s). These stock characters are possibly a reference to the abuse that Dahl stated that he experienced in the boarding schools he attended.  They usually contain a lot of black humour and grotesque scenarios, including gruesome violence. The Witches, George's Marvellous Medicine and Matilda are examples of this formula. The BFG follows it in a more analogous way with the good giant (the BFG or "Big Friendly Giant") representing the "good adult" archetype and the other giants being the "bad adults". This formula is also somewhat evident in Dahl's film script for Chitty Chitty Bang Bang. Class-conscious themes – ranging from the thinly veiled to the blatant – also surface in works such as Fantastic Mr Fox and Danny, the Champion of the World. Dahl also features in his books characters who are very fat, usually children. Augustus Gloop, Bruce Bogtrotter and Bruno Jenkins are a few of these characters, although an enormous woman named Aunt Sponge is featured in James and the Giant Peach and the nasty farmer Boggis in Fantastic Mr Fox is an enormously fat character. All of these characters (with the possible exception of Bruce Bogtrotter) are either villains or simply unpleasant gluttons. They are usually punished for this: Augustus Gloop drinks from Willy Wonka's chocolate river, disregarding the adults who tell him not to, and falls in, getting sucked up a pipe and nearly being turned into fudge. In Matilda, Bruce Bogtrotter steals cake from the evil headmistress, Miss Trunchbull, and is forced to eat a gigantic chocolate cake in front of the school. Featuring in The Witches, Bruno Jenkins is turned into a mouse by witches who lure him to their convention with the promise of chocolate, and, it is speculated, possibly disowned or even killed by his parents because of this. Aunt Sponge is flattened by a giant peach. Dahl's mother used to tell him and his sisters tales about trolls and other mythical Norwegian creatures and some of his children's books contain references or elements inspired by these stories, such as the giants in The BFG, the fox family in Fantastic Mr Fox and the trolls in The Minpins.In his poetry, Dahl gives a humorous re-interpretation of well-known nursery rhymes and fairy tales, providing surprise endings in place of the traditional happily-ever-after. Dahl's collection of poems Revolting Rhymes is recorded in audio book form, and narrated by actor Alan Cumming. 
ScreenplaysFor a brief period in the 1960s, Dahl wrote screenplays. Two, the James Bond film You Only Live Twice and Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, were adaptations of novels by Ian Fleming, though both were rewritten and completed by other writers. Dahl created the Child Catcher, the supporting antagonist in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang; in a 2005 poll, it was voted the scariest villain in children's literature.  Dahl also began adapting his own novel Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, which was completed and rewritten by David Seltzer after Dahl failed to meet deadlines, and produced as the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971). Dahl later disowned the film, saying he was "disappointed" because "he thought it placed too much emphasis on Willy Wonka and not enough on Charlie".  He was also "infuriated" by the deviations in the plot devised by David Seltzer in his draft of the screenplay. This resulted in his refusal for any more versions of the book to be made in his lifetime, as well as an adaption for the sequel Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator. 
InfluencesA major part of Dahl's literary influences stemmed from his childhood. In his younger days, he was an avid reader, especially awed by fantastic tales of heroism and triumph. Amongst his favourite authors were Rudyard Kipling, William Makepeace Thackeray, Frederick Marryat and Charles Dickens, and their works went on to make a lasting mark on his life and writing. Dahl was also a huge fan of ghost stories and claimed that Trolls by Jonas Lie was one of the finest ghost stories ever written. While he was still a youngster, his mother, Sofie Dahl, would relate traditional Norwegian myths and legends from her native homeland to Dahl and his sisters. Dahl always maintained that his mother and her stories had a strong influence on his writing. In one interview, he mentioned: "She was a great teller of tales. Her memory was prodigious and nothing that ever happened to her in her life was forgotten."  When Dahl started writing and publishing his famous books for children, he created a grandmother character in The Witches and later stated that she was based directly on his own mother as a tribute.  
TelevisionIn 1961, Dahl hosted and wrote for a science fiction and horror television anthology series called Way Out, which preceded the Twilight Zone series on the CBS network for 14 episodes from March to July.  One of the last dramatic network shows shot in New York City, the entire series is available for viewing at The Paley Center for Media in New York City and Los Angeles. The British television series, Tales of the Unexpected, originally aired on ITV between 1979 and 1988.  The series was released to tie in with Dahl's Tales of the Unexpected, which had introduced readers to many motifs that were common in his writing.  The series was an anthology of different tales, initially based on Dahl's short stories.  The stories were sometimes sinister, sometimes wryly comedic and usually had a twist ending. Dahl introduced on camera all the episodes of the first two series, which bore the full title Roald Dahl's Tales of the Unexpected. 
Bibliography 
 
Children's stories

The Gremlins (1943)
James and the Giant Peach (1961) – Film: James and the Giant Peach (live-action/animated) (1996)
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (1964) Published in 1978 in an omnibus edition titled The Complete Adventures of Charlie and Willy Wonka  – Films: Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971) and Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005)
The Magic Finger (1 June 1966)
Fantastic Mr Fox (9 December 1970) – Film: Fantastic Mr. Fox (animated) (2009)
Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator (9 January 1972)  A sequel to Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.
Danny, the Champion of the World (30 October 1975) – Film: Danny the Champion of the World (TV movie) (1989)
The Enormous Crocodile (24 August 1978)
The Twits (17 December 1980)
George's Marvellous Medicine (21 May 1981)
The BFG (14 October 1982) – Film: The BFG (animated) (1989)
The Witches (27 October 1983) – Film: The Witches (1990)
The Giraffe and the Pelly and Me (26 September 1985)
Matilda (21 April 1988) – Film: Matilda (1996)
Esio Trot (19 April 1989)
The Vicar of Nibbleswicke (9 May 1990)
The Minpins (8 August 1991)



Children's poetry
Revolting Rhymes (10 June 1982)
Dirty Beasts (25 October 1984)
Rhyme Stew (21 September 1989)
 
Adult fiction

Novels
Sometime Never: A Fable for Supermen (1948)
My Uncle Oswald (1979)



Short story collections
Over To You: Ten Stories of Flyers and Flying (1946)
Someone Like You (1953)
Lamb to the Slaughter (1953)
Kiss Kiss (1960)
Twenty-Nine Kisses from Roald Dahl (1969)
Switch Bitch (1974)
The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar and Six More (1977)
The Best of Roald Dahl (1978)
Tales of the Unexpected (1979)
More Tales of the Unexpected (1980)
Roald Dahl's Book of Ghost Stories (1983). Edited with an introduction by Dahl.
The Roald Dahl Omnibus (Dorset Press, 1986)
Two Fables (1986). "Princess and the Poacher" and "Princess Mammalia".
Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life: The Country Stories of Roald Dahl (1989)
The Collected Short Stories of Dahl (1991)
The Roald Dahl Treasury (1997)
The Great Automatic Grammatizator (1997). (Known in the USA as The Umbrella Man and Other Stories).
Skin And Other Stories (2000)
Roald Dahl: Collected Stories (2006)

See the alphabetical List of Roald Dahl short stories. See also Roald Dahl: Collected Stories for a complete, chronological listing.
 
 
 
Non-fiction

The Mildenhall Treasure (1946, 1977, 1999)
Boy – Tales of Childhood (1984) Recollections up to the age of 20, looking particularly at schooling in Britain in the early part of the 20th century.
Going Solo (1986) Continuation of his autobiography, in which he goes to work for Shell and spends some time working in Tanzania before joining the war effort and becoming one of the last Allied pilots to withdraw from Greece during the German invasion.
Measles, a Dangerous Illness (1988) 
Memories with Food at Gipsy House (1991)
Roald Dahl's Guide to Railway Safety (1991)
My Year (1993)
Roald Dahl's Revolting Recipes by Felicity Dahl, et al. (1994), a collection of recipes based on and inspired by food in Dahl's books, created by Roald & Felicity Dahl and Josie Fison
Roald Dahl's Even More Revolting Recipes by Felicity Dahl, et al. (2001)


Plays

The Honeys (1955) Produced at the Longacre Theatre on Broadway.
 
Film scripts

The Gremlins (1943)
36 Hours (1965)
You Only Live Twice (1967)
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (1968)
The Night Digger (1971)
Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971)


Television

Way Out (1961) Horror series hosted by Roald Dahl and produced by David Susskind
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "Lamb to the Slaughter" (1958)
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "Dip in the Pool" (1958)
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "Poison" (1958)
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "Man from the South" (1960) with Steve McQueen and Peter Lorre
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "Mrs. Bixby and the Colonel's Coat" (1960)
Alfred Hitchcock Presents: "The Landlady" (1961)
Tales of the Unexpected (1979–1988), episodes written and introduced by Dahl
 
 
References 
Sources

Philip Howard, "Dahl, Roald (1916–1990)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, May 2006   Retrieved 24 May 2006
Donald Sturrock, Storyteller: The Life of Roald Dahl, Harper Press, 2010. ISBN 9780007254767 (See the link to excerpts in "External Links", below.)


External links 
 
 

 
Roald Dahl's darkest hour (biography excerpt)
 
 
 
Radio interview with Dahl in Norwegian by NRK (1975)
The Irregulars, Roald Dahl and the British Spy Ring in Wartime Washington, 2008, New York Times Review, 17 October 2008.
February 2011 profile of Patricia Neal on V.O.A.
Footage of Roald Dahl judging at the Whitbread book prize in 1982

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
DEFAULTSORT


















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Charles Addams
 
  
Charles Samuel "Chaz" Addams   (January 7, 1912 – September 29, 1988) was an American cartoonist known for his darkly humorous and macabre characters. Some of the recurring characters, who became known as the Addams Family, became the basis for two live-action television series, two animated TV series, three motion pictures and a Broadway musical.
Biography
LifeCharles Samuel Addams was born in Westfield, New Jersey, the son of Grace M. (née Spears) and Charles Huy Addams, a piano-company executive who had studied to be an architect.  He was known as "something of a rascal around the neighborhood" as childhood friends recalled.  Addams was distantly related to U.S. presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams, despite the different spellings of their last names, and was a first cousin twice removed to noted social reformer Jane Addams.    A house on Elm Street, and another on Dudley Avenue that police once caught him breaking into, are said to be the inspiration for the Addams Family mansion in his cartoons.  College Hall, the oldest building on the current campus of the University of Pennsylvania, where Addams studied, was also an inspiration for the mansion.  He was fond of visiting the Presbyterian Cemetery on Mountain Avenue.  One friend said of him, "His sense of humor was a little different from everybody else's." He was also artistically inclined, "drawing with a happy vengeance" according to a biographer. His father encouraged him to draw, and Addams did cartoons for the Westfield High School student literary magazine, Weathervane.   He attended Colgate University in 1929 and 1930, and the University of Pennsylvania, where a fine-arts building on campus is named for him, in 1930 and 1931. In front of the building is a sculpture of the silhouettes of Addams Family characters.  He then studied at the Grand Central School of Art in New York City in 1931 and 1932.  In 1933 he joined the layout department of True Detective magazine, where he had to retouch photos of corpses that appeared in the magazine's stories to remove the blood from them. Addams complained that "A lot of those corpses were more interesting the way they were." His first drawing in The New Yorker ran on February 6, 1932 (a sketch of a window washer), and his cartoons ran regularly in the magazine from 1938, when he drew the first instance of what came to be called the Addams Family, until his death. He was a freelancer throughout that time.  During World War II, Addams served at the Signal Corps Photographic Center in New York, where he made animated training films for the U.S. Army. In late 1942, he met his first wife, Barbara Jean Day, who purportedly resembled the cartoon Morticia Addams.  The marriage ended eight years later, after Addams, who hated small children, refused to adopt one.  She later married New Yorker colleague John Hersey, author of the book Hiroshima. He married his second wife, Barbara Barb (Estelle B. Barb), in 1954. A practicing lawyer, she "combined Morticia-like looks with diabolical legal scheming," by which she wound up controlling the "Addams Family" television and movie franchises and persuaded her husband to give away other legal rights.  At one point, she got her husband to take out a $100,000 insurance policy. Addams consulted a lawyer on the sly, who later humorously wrote, "I told him the last time I had word of such a move was in a picture called Double Indemnity starring Barbara Stanwyck, which I called to his attention." In the movie, Stanwyck's character plotted her husband's murder.  No one has accused Barbara Barb Addams of attempting the same. They divorced in 1956. The Addams Family television series began after David Levy, a television producer, approached Addams with an offer to create it with a little help from the humorist. All Addams had to do was give his characters names and more characteristics for the actors to use in portrayals. The series ran on ABC for two seasons, from 1964 to 1966. Addams was "sociable and debonair," and described by a biographer as "A well-dressed, courtly man with silvery back-combed hair and a gentle manner, he bore no resemblance to a fiend." Figuratively a  , Addams squired celebrities such as Greta Garbo, Joan Fontaine and Jacqueline Kennedy on social occasions. Later, he married his third and last wife, Marilyn Matthews Miller, best known as "Tee" (1926–2002), in a pet cemetery.  In 1985, the Addamses moved to Sagaponack, New York, where they named their estate "The Swamp." 
DeathAddams died September 29, 1988, at St. Clare's Hospital and Health Center in New York City, having suffered a heart attack while still in his car after parking it.  An ambulance took him from his apartment to the hospital, where he died in the emergency room. Eric Pace, "Charles Addams Dead at 76; Found Humor in the Macabre" New York Times, September 30, 1988, accessed October 11, 2009.  As he had requested, a wake was held rather than a funeral; he had wished to be remembered as a "good cartoonist."  He was cremated, and his ashes were buried in the pet cemetery of his estate "The Swamp."  
CartoonsHis cartoons regularly appeared in The New Yorker, and he also created a syndicated comic strip, Out of This World, which ran in 1956. There are many collections of his work, including Drawn and Quartered (1942) and Monster Rally (1950), the latter with a foreword by John O'Hara. Typical of Addams's work, one cartoon shows two men standing in a room labeled "Patent Attorney." One is pointing a bizarre gun out the window toward the street and saying, "Death ray, fiddlesticks! Why, it doesn't even slow them up!"Dear Dead Days (1959) is not a collection of his cartoons (although it reprints a few from previous collections); it is a scrapbook-like compendium of vintage images (and occasional pieces of text) that appealed to Addams's sense of the grotesque, including Victorian woodcuts, vintage medicine-show advertisements and a boyhood photograph of Francesco Lentini, who had three legs.Addams drew more than 1,300 cartoons over the course of his life. Those that did not appear in The New Yorker were often in Collier's and TV Guide.    In 1961, Addams received, from the Mystery Writers of America, a Special Edgar Award for his body of work. His cartoons appeared in books, calendars and other merchandising. Singer-guitarist Dean Gitter's 1957 recording Ghost Ballads (Riverside, RLP 12-636), folk songs with supernatural themes, was packaged with album art by Addams showing a haunted house.In 1946, Addams met science-fiction writer Ray Bradbury after having drawn an illustration for Mademoiselle magazine's publication of Bradbury's short story "Homecoming", the first in a series of tales chronicling a family of Illinois vampires named the Elliotts. The pair became friends and planned to collaborate on a book of the Elliott Family's complete history with Bradbury writing and Addams providing the illustrations, but it never materialized. Bradbury's stories about the "Elliott Family" were finally anthologized in From the Dust Returned in October 2001, with a connecting narrative and an explanation of his work with Addams, and Addams' 1946 Mademoiselle illustration used for the book's cover jacket. Although Addams' own characters were well-established by the time of their initial encounter, in a 2001 interview Bradbury states that "(Addams) went his way and created the Addams Family and I went my own way and created my family in this book."  Janet Maslin, in a review of an Addams biography for The New York Times, wrote, "Addams's persona sounds cooked up for the benefit of feature writers... was at least partly a character contrived for the public eye," noting that one outré publicity photo showed the humorist wearing a suit of armor at home, "but the shelves behind him hold books about painting and antiques, as well as a novel by John Updike."   In Alfred Hitchcock's North by Northwest, Cary Grant references Charles Addams in the auction scene. Discovering Eve with Mr. Vandamm and Leonard, he says, "The three of you together. Now that's a picture only Charles Addams could draw." The filmmaker was a friend of Addams', and owned two pieces of original Addams art. Davis, Linda H., "First Chapter: 'Charles Addams'", The New York Times, December 3, 2006  Addams is also mentioned as "Chas Addams" in Edward Eager's fantasy novel Knight's Castle.
Bibliography
By Addams
Books of Addams's drawings or illustrated by him 

Drawn and Quartered (1942), first anthology of drawings (Random House)
Addams and Evil (1947), second anthology of drawings, (Simon and Schuster)
(illustrations) Afternoon in the Attic (1950), John Kobler’s anthology of short stories
Monster Rally (1950) third anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Homebodies (book) (1954) fourth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Nightcrawlers (1957), fifth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Dear Dead Days: A Family Album (1959), compilations book of photos (G.P. Putnam & Sons)
Black Maria (1960), sixth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Drawn and Quartered (1962) re-released (Simon & Schuster)
The Groaning Board (1964), seventh anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
The Chas Addams Mother Goose (1967) Windmill Books
My Crowd (1970), eighth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Favorite Haunts (1976), ninth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
Creature Comforts (1981), tenth anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster)
The World of Charles Addams, by Charles Addams (1991), posthumously compiled from works with the copyright owned by his second wife, later named Lady Barbara Cloyton (Knopf) ISBN 0-394-58822-3
Half - Baked Cookbook, by Charles Addams (2005), anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster) ISBN 0-7432-6775-3
Happily Ever After: A Collection of Cartoons to Chill the Heart of Your Loved One, by Charles Addams (2006), anthology of drawings (Simon & Schuster) ISBN 978-0-7432-6777-9
The Addams Family: An Evilution (2010), about the evolution of The Addams Family characters (arranged by H. Kevin Miserocchi) ISBN 978-0-7649-5388-0


About Addams

Davis, Linda H., Charles Addams: A Cartoonist's Life (2006), Random House, 382 pages


See also

Edward Gorey, contemporary American cartoonist with similar macabre style


References  

Obituary, New York Times, Sept. 30, 1988, p. A1
Strickler, Dave. Syndicated Comic Strips and Artists, 1924-1995: The Complete Index. Cambria, CA: Comics Access, 1995. ISBN 0-9700077-0-1.
"The Charms of the Macabre: Charles Addams's cartoon world is full of loving and caring people. How odd." WSJ book review of The Addams Family: An Evilution Edited by H. Kevin Miserocchi.
 
External links

Charles Addams Foundation

  
 
DEFAULTSORT












 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Elizabeth Gaskell
 
 
Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell, née Stevenson (29 September 1810 – 12 November 1865), often referred to simply as Mrs Gaskell, was a British novelist and short story writer during the Victorian era. Her novels offer a detailed portrait of the lives of many strata of society, including the very poor, and as such are of interest to social historians as well as lovers of literature. 
Early lifeGaskell was born Elizabeth Cleghorn Stevenson on 29 September 1810, at 93 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. She was the youngest of eight children; only she and her brother John survived infancy. Her father, William Stevenson, was a Scottish Unitarian minister at Failsworth, Lancashire but resigned his orders on conscientious grounds and moved to London in 1806 with intention of going to India after he was appointed private secretary to the Earl of Lauderdale, who was to become Governor-General of India. This position did not materialise, and Stevenson was nominated Keeper of the Treasury Records. His wife, Elizabeth Holland, came from a family from the English Midlands that was well connected with other Unitarian and prominent families like the Wedgwoods, the Turners and the Darwins, and when she died 13 months after giving birth to her youngest daughter,    she left a bewildered husband who saw no alternative for Elizabeth but to be sent  to live with her mother's sister, Hannah Lumb, in Knutsford, Cheshire. While she was growing up her future was uncertain as she had no personal wealth and no firm home, even though she was a permanent guest at her aunt and grandparents' house. Her father married Catherine Thomson in 1814 and they had a son, William (born 1815) and a daughter, Catherine (born 1816). Although Elizabeth spent several years without seeing her father and his new family, her older brother John often visited her in Knutsford. John was destined for the Royal Navy from an early age like his grandfathers and uncles, but he had no entry and had to join the Merchant Navy with the East India Company's fleet.  John went missing in 1827 during an expedition to India.Much of Elizabeth's childhood was spent in Cheshire, where she lived with her aunt Hannah Lumb in Knutsford, a town she immortalised as Cranford. They lived in a large, red brick house called Heathwaite, on Heathside (now Gaskell Avenue), which faces the large open area of Knutsford Heath. From 1821 to 1826 she attended a school run by the Miss Byerlys at Barford House, and after that Avonbank in Stratford-on-Avon  where she received a traditional education in arts, the classics, decorum and propriety given to young ladies at the time. Her aunts gave her the classics to read, and she was encouraged by her father in her studies and writing. Her brother John sent her modern books and descriptions of his life at sea and his experiences abroad.   After leaving school aged 16, she travelled to London to spend time with her Holland cousins.  She spent some time in Newcastle upon Tyne (with the Rev William Turner's family) and in Edinburgh. Her stepmother's brother was the miniature artist, William John Thomson, who painted the 1832 portrait of Gaskell in Manchester. A bust of Gaskell was sculpted by David Dunbar at the same time. 
Married life and writing career
On 30 August 1832 Elizabeth married minister, William Gaskell in Knutsford. They spent their honeymoon in North Wales, staying with Elizabeth's uncle, Samuel Holland near Porthmadog. The Gaskells settled in Manchester, where William was the minister at Cross Street Unitarian Chapel. Manchester's industrial surroundings influenced Elizabeth's writing in the industrial genre. Their first child, a daughter, was stillborn in 1833. A son, William, (1844–45), died in infancy, and this tragedy was the catalyst for Gaskell's first novel, Mary Barton. Their other children were Marianne (1834), Margaret Emily, known as Meta (1837), Florence Elizabeth (1842), and Julia Bradford (1846). Florence married Charles Crompton, a barrister and Liberal politician, in 1863. In March 1835 Gaskell began a diary, documenting the development of her daughter Marianne, her views of herself and William as parents, the value she gave to her role as a mother, her religious faith, and later the relationship between Marianne and her sister, Meta. In 1836 with her husband, she co-authored the cycle of poems Sketches among the Poor which was published in Blackwood's Magazine in January 1837. In March 1837 her Aunt Lumb had a stroke, and died less than a month later. In 1840 William Howitt published Visits to Remarkable Places containing a contribution entitled Clopton Hall by "a lady", the first work written and published solely by Gaskell. In April 1840 Howitt published The Rural Life of England, which included her second work, Notes on Cheshire Customs. In July 1841 the Gaskells travelled to Belgium and Germany. German literature had a strong influence on her short story writing in regard to theme and structure. In 1847 she published her first work of fiction Libbie Marsh's Three Eras in Howitt's Journal, using the pseudonym, "Cotton Mather Mills". Her next work The Sexton's Hero was published with the same name. She made her last use of the pseudonym in 1848 with the publication of her story Christmas Storms and Sunshine. Her first novel Mary Barton was published in October, 1848. In 1850 the family moved to a villa at 84 Plymouth Grove. Uglow J. Elizabeth Gaskell: A Habit of Stories (Faber and Faber; 1993) (ISBN 0-571-20359-0)  where Elizabeth wrote her remaining literary works while her husband held welfare committees and tutored the poor in his study. The Gaskells' social circle included literary greats, religious dissenters, and social reformers, including William  and Mary Howitt. Charles Dickens and John Ruskin visited Plymouth Grove, as did American writers Harriet Beecher Stowe and Charles Eliot Norton, while conductor Charles Hallé, who lived close by, taught piano to one of their daughters. Her close friend Charlotte Brontë stayed there three times, and on one occasion hid behind the drawing room curtains as she was too shy to meet Gaskell's visitors.  . 

In early 1850 Gaskell wrote to Charles Dickens, asking advice about assisting a girl named Pasley whom she had visited in prison. Pasley provided Gaskell with a model for the title character of Ruth in 1853. Lizzie Leigh was published in March and April, 1850, in the first numbers of Dickens's journal Household Words where many of her works were published including Cranford and, in 1854-55, North and South, her novella My Lady Ludlow, and short stories. In June 1855  Patrick Brontë asked her to write a biography of his daughter, Charlotte, and The Life of Charlotte Brontë was published in 1857. This played a significant role in developing her own (impending) literary career. In 1859 Gaskell travelled to Whitby to gather material for Sylvia's Lovers, which was published in 1863. Her novella Cousin Phyllis was serialized in The Cornhill Magazine from November 1863 to February 1864. The serialization of her last novel Wives and Daughters began in August 1864 in The Cornhill.  She died of a heart attack in 1865, while visiting a house she had purchased in Holybourne, Hampshire. Wives and Daughters was published in book form in early 1866, first in America, and then, ten days later, in England. The house on Plymouth Grove remained in the Gaskell family until 1913, after which it stood empty and fell into disrepair. The University of Manchester acquired it in 1969 and in 2004 it was acquired by the Manchester Historic Buildings Trust. The trust raised money to restore it. Exterior renovations were completed in 2011, and the house is open for monthly tours while renovations continue.  On 25 September 2010 a memorial to Gaskell was dedicated in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. It takes the form of a panel in the Hubbard memorial window, above the tomb of Geoffrey Chaucer. The panel was dedicated by her great-great-granddaughter Rosemary Dabbs and a wreath was laid. 
Literary style and themes
Gaskell's first novel, Mary Barton, was published anonymously in 1848. The best known of her remaining novels are Cranford (1853), North and South (1854), and Wives and Daughters (1865). She became popular for her writing, especially her ghost stories, aided by Charles Dickens, who published her work in his magazine Household Words. Her ghost stories are quite distinct, in the "Gothic" vein, from her industrial fiction.Even though her writing conforms to Victorian conventions (including signing her name "Mrs. Gaskell"), Gaskell usually frames her stories as critiques of contemporary attitudes: her early works focused on factory work in the Midlands. She always emphasised the role of women, with complex narratives and dynamic female characters. 
ThemesUnitarianism urges comprehension and tolerance toward all religions and, even though Gaskell tried to keep her own beliefs hidden, she felt strongly about these values, which permeated her works—as in North and South, where "Margaret the Churchwoman, her father the Dissenter, Higgins the Infidel, knelt down together. It did them no harm".  
Dialect usageGaskell's style is notable for putting local dialect words into the voice of middle-class characters and of the narrator. For example, in North and South Margaret Hale suggests redding up (tidying) the Bouchers' house and even offers jokingly to teach her mother words such as knobstick (strike-breaker). Ingham P. (1995) Introduction to the Penguin Classics edition of North and South  Her husband collected Lancashire dialect, and Gaskell defended her use of dialect as expressing otherwise inexpressible concepts in an 1854 letter to Walter Savage Landor: She used the dialect word "nesh" (soft), which goes back to Old English, in Mary Barton: and later in 'The Manchester Marriage' [1858]: 
Publications
Novels

Mary Barton (1848)
Cranford (1851–3)
Ruth (1853)
North and South (1854–55)
Sylvia's Lovers (1863)
Wives and Daughters: An Everyday Story (1865)


Novellas and collections

The Moorland Cottage (1850)
 
The Old Nurse's Story (1852)
Lizzie Leigh (1855)
My Lady Ludlow (1859)
Round the Sofa (1859)
Lois the Witch (1861)
A Dark Night's Work (1863)
Cousin Phillis (1864)


Short stories

Libbie Marsh's Three Eras (1847)
The Sexton's Hero (1847)
Christmas Storms and Sunshine (1848)
Hand and Heart (1849)
The Well of Pen-Morfa (1850)
The Heart of John Middleton (1850)
Disappearances (1851)
Bessy's Troubles at Home (1852)
The Old Nurse's Story (1852)
Cumberland Sheep-Shearers (1853)
Morton Hall (1853)
Traits and Stories of the Huguenots (1853)
My French Master (1853)
The Squire's Story (1853)
Half a Life-time Ago (1855)
Company Manners (1854)
The Poor Clare (1856)
The Doom of the Griffiths (1858)
Right at Last (1858)
"The Manchester Marriage" (1858) 
The Haunted House (1859) 
The Crooked Branch (1859)
The Half-brothers (1859)
Curious If True (1860)
The Grey Woman (1861)
The Cage at Cranford (1863)
Crowley Castle (1863)


Non-fiction

Sketches Among the Poor (poems 1837)
An Accursed Race (1855)
The Life of Charlotte Brontë (1857)
French Life (1864)


See also

Illegitimacy in fiction


Notes 
External links
General and miscellaneous 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
North and South, the Musical – a new musical based on E. Gaskell's novel
The Visual Life of Elizabeth Gaskell
 
A collection of Elizabeth Gaskell's Manuscripts found at the Archives Hub


Locations

 
 
 
 

   
 
DEFAULTSORT












 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	R. Kelly
  
 Robert Sylvester Kelly (born January 8, 1967),  known by his stage name R. Kelly, is an American singer-songwriter and record producer. Often referred to as the King of R&B, Kelly is recognized as one of the most successful R&B artists of all-time. A native of Chicago, Illinois, Kelly began performing during the late 1980s and debuted in 1992 with the group Public Announcement. In 1993, Kelly went solo with the album 12 Play. He is known for a collection of major hit singles including "Bump n' Grind", "Your Body's Callin'", "I Believe I Can Fly", "Gotham City", "Ignition (Remix)", "If I Could Turn Back the Hands of Time", "The World's Greatest", "I'm a Flirt", and the hip-hopera "Trapped in the Closet". In 1998, Kelly won three Grammy Awards for "I Believe I Can Fly".Kelly has written, produced, and remixed songs for many artists including The Winans, The Isley Brothers, Charlie Wilson, Quincy Jones, K-Ci & JoJo, Aaliyah, Janet Jackson, Whitney Houston, Toni Braxton, Michael Jackson, Hi-Five, Nivea, Ciara, Mary J. Blige, Luther Vandross, Gerald LeVert, Raheem DeVaughn, Ruben Studdard, Jaheim, Kelly Price, Tamia, Maxwell, Celine Dion, Britney Spears, Usher, B2K, Twista, Tyrese, Jennifer Lopez, Trey Songz, and others in the U.S. and abroad.The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) has recognized R. Kelly as one of the best-selling music artists in the United States with 38.5 million albums sold as well as only the fifth black artist to crack the top 50 of the same list.    In March 2011, R. Kelly was named the most successful R&B artist of the last 25 years by Billboard.          Kelly has released 10 studio albums, sold 38.5 million albums in the U.S., 15 million singles, and over 54 million albums worldwide making him the most successful R&B male artist of 1990s.            
Early lifeBorn and raised on the South Side of Chicago, Illinois, Kelly was the third of four children.    Kelly's single mother, Joan, was a singer and a Baptist. Kelly's father was absent throughout most of Kelly's life.     Kelly began singing in church at age eight.  In Chicago, Kelly's family lived in the projects at 63rd Street before relocating to a small house at 107th and Parnell Streets. Kelly entered Kenwood Academy in Chicago's Hyde Park neighborhood in the fall of 1980 where he met his music teacher Lena McLin, who encouraged Kelly to perform the Stevie Wonder classic Ribbon in the Sky in a highschool talent show.   As a teenager, Kelly began street performing (or busking) under the Chicago 'L' trains before he eventually formed a group with his friend Marc McWilliams. In 1989, Kelly and McWilliams formed the group MGM (Musically Gifted Men). In 1991, Along with Vincent Corey Walker and Shawnth Brooks, Kelly performed on the TV talent show Big Break, hosted by Natalie Cole, and went on to win the $100,000 grand prize.
Recording career
1992–94: Born Into the 90's and 12 PlayCredited as R. Kelly and Public Announcement, the debut album Born into the 90's was released in early 1992, during the new jack swing period of the early nineties. The album yielded the R&B hits "She's Got That Vibe", "Honey Love", "Dedicated", and "Slow Dance (Hey Mr. DJ)", all of which were led by Kelly.    During late 1992, Kelly and Public Announcement embarked on a tour called "60653", whose title was the zip code of Kelly's neighborhood.  This would be the only album co-credited with Public Announcement. Kelly separated from the group in January 1993.  
Kelly's first solo album, 12 Play, was released on November 9, 1993 and yielded the singer's first number-one hit, "Bump N' Grind", which spent a record-breaking 12 weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot R&B Singles chart. Subsequent hit singles: "Your Body's Callin'" (U.S. Hot 100: #13, U.S. R&B: #2) and "Sex Me" (U.S. Hot 100: #20, U.S. R&B: #8). Both singles sold 500,000 copies in the United States and were certified Gold by the RIAA.  In 1994, 12 Play was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), eventually going six times platinum.   Following the success of 12 Play, Kelly found himself in huge demand as a writer, producer, and mixer. On June 13, 1994, Kelly's protégé Aaliyah released her debut album titled Age Ain't Nothing But a Number which was entirely written and produced by R. Kelly. The album peaked at number 18 on the Billboard 200 and sold over three million copies in the United States. Age Ain't Nothing But a Number spawned two hit singles: "Back & Forth" (U.S. Hot 100: #5, U.S. R&B: #1); blocked Kelly's "Your Body's Callin' from the top spot and "At Your Best (You Are Love)" (U.S. Hot 100: #6, U.S. R&B: #2). Kelly also wrote and produced the female R&B duo Changing Faces first two hit singles, "Stroke You Up" (U.S. Hot 100: #3, U.S. R&B: #2) and "Foolin' Around" (U.S. R&B: #9). During this time, Kelly also became widely known for his remixes. He remixed his own songs, Bump N' Grind, Sex Me and "Homie Lover Friend", a remix featured on the A Low Down Dirty Shame (soundtrack) along with Aaliyah's song, "The Thing I Like" which was written and produced by Kelly, as well. Kelly remixed songs for other artists including Aaliyah, Barry White and Toni Braxton. He produced the popular remix for Janet Jackson's 1994 hit "Any Time, Any Place" and was featured on Jackson's remix album, Janet Remixed.
1995–96: R. Kelly and I Believe I Can FlyIn 1995, Kelly garnered his first-ever Grammy nominations; two nominations for writing, producing and composing Michael Jackson's last number one hit "You Are Not Alone".  Kelly's success continued with the release of his second studio album, R. Kelly which was released on November 14, 1995 in the United States (see 1995 in music). Critics praised Kelly for his departure from salacious bedroom songs to embracing vulnerability. New York Time's Stephen Holden described Kelly as "The reigning king of pop-soul sex talks a lot tougher than Barry White, the father of such fluffed-up pillow talk and along with Marvin Gaye and Donny Hathaway, a major influence on Kelly."  In December 1995, Professor Michael Eric Dyson critiqued Kelly's self-titled album for Vibe (magazine). Dyson described Kelly's growth from the 12 Play album: "Kelly reshapes his personal turmoil to artistic benefit" and noted that Kelly is "reborn before our very own ears." The album reached number one on the Billboard 200 chart, becoming Kelly's first number one album on the chart, and reached number one on the R&B album charts; his second. R. Kelly spawned three platinum hit singles: "You Remind Me of Something" (U.S. Hot 100: #4, U.S. R&B: #1), "I Can't Sleep (Baby If I)" (U.S. Hot 100: #5, U.S. R&B: #1), and "Down Low (Nobody Has To Know)" (U.S. Hot 100: #4, U.S. R&B: #1); a duet with Ronald Isley. Kelly's self-titled album sold four million copies, thus receiving 4× platinum certification from the RIAA.  Kelly promoted the album with a 50-city "Down Low Top Secret Tour" with LL Cool J, Xscape, and Solo. In May 1996, Kelly was featured on the cover of Ebony Man (EM) magazine with the headline proclaiming "R. Kelly The new King of R&B" where he discussed touring, working with Quincy Jones, Toni Braxton, and Janet Jackson ("When I first met them, I could tell they liked my albums. There was always a certain song they named off my album. They said they wanted something like that." Braxton liked "Your Body's Callin'".), as well as his influences Marvin Gaye, Donny Hathaway ("The way he approached the woman he loved in his songs. He didn't hold back" he says of Hathaway. "He was raw with what he had to say. And Marvin Gaye was the same.") and Michael Jackson's dedication to music ("He's another person that I feel is married to his music. That's why we related so well.")In 1996, Kelly released one of his most successful singles with "I Believe I Can Fly", an inspirational song originally released on the soundtrack for the film Space Jam. "I Believe I Can Fly" reached No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100, and No. 1 on the UK charts for three weeks and won three Grammy Awards in 1998.  Rolling Stone magazine named it as the 406th of its top 500 songs of all time.   
1997–99: R. and Life SoundtrackIn 1997, Kelly fulfilled a longtime dream of his and signed a contract to play basketball with the Atlantic City Seagulls of the USBL. Kelly wore the number 12 in honor of his album 12 Play.  Kelly said "I love basketball enough to not totally let go of my music, but just put it to the side for a minute, and fulfill some dreams of mine that I've had for a long time." Kelly's USBL contract contained a clause that would allow him to fulfill a music obligation when necessary. "If Whitney Houston needs a song written", Gross said, "he would be able to leave the team to do that and come back". "It wasn't a gimmick," said Ken Gross, the Seagulls owner who signed Kelly. "He's a ballplayer. He can play."  Kelly is the first music artist to play professional basketball. In 1998, Kelly released R., his fourth studio album and first double album. The album spans different genres from radio pop (Celine Dion), street rap (Nas and Jay-Z) to Blues ("Suicide"). It was released in the United States on November 17, 1998 (see 1998 in music). Dave Hoekstra of the Los Angeles Times described the album as "easily the most ambitious project of his career."  R. is the first album that Kelly allowed other record producers to contribute on his album, as opposed to producing the entire album himself, and his first time collaborating with various artists on his album. The album remains Kelly's biggest selling album to date having sold 8 million copies in the United States and 4 million copies internationally.R. reached number one on the R&B albums chart, becoming Kelly's third number one album to do so, and entered at number two on the Billboard 200 chart. It spawned Kelly's second number one hit on the Billboard Hot 100, "I'm Your Angel", a duet with Celine Dion and notable classics such as "When A Woman's Fed Up" (Hot R&B/Hip-Hop: #5) and "If I Could Turn Back The Hands of Time" (Hot 100: #12, UK: #2).    The album also contains Kelly's international hit, "I Believe I Can Fly", which had been released two years prior on the Space Jam soundtrack.In 1998, Kelly wrote and produced the debut album of his protégé Sparkle, which was released under his Rockland label and distributed through Interscope. In 2000,Sparkle went Gold due to the success of the first single, "Be Careful", a duet featuring R. Kelly.  Since the success of Space Jam's "I Believe I Can Fly", Kelly gained notoriety for penning songs to popular soundtracks such as Batman & Robin ("Gotham City") and Life ("Fortunate"). In 1999, Kelly wrote and produced, along with contribution from Wyclef Jean, the majority of the soundtrack to the Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence film Life. Kelly composed ten songs on the soundtrack, while Jean composed five.
2000–02: TP-2.COM and The Best of Both WorldsAs the year 2000 commenced, Kelly racked up a slew of new awards reflecting his status as an established R&B superstar. In January 2000, Kelly had won Favorite Male Soul/R&B Artist at the American Music Awards, and in February, was nominated for several Grammy Awards, including Best Male R&B Vocal Performance ("When a Woman's Fed Up"), Best R&B Album (R.), and Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group ("Satisfy You") with P. Diddy. On November 7, 2000, Kelly released his fifth studio album TP-2.com, an album harking back to his breakthrough album, 12 Play. Unlike Kelly's previous effort, R., all songs on TP-2.com was written, arranged, and produced entirely by Kelly. Allmusic's Jason Birchmeier rated TP-2.com with 4 stars and described Kelly's style: "Kelly knows how to take proven formulas and funnel them through his own stylistic aesthetic, which usually means slowing down the tempo, laying on lush choruses of strings and background vocals, taming down the lyrics for radio, and catering his pitch primarily to wistful women. The album was Kelly's second album to peak at #1 on the Billboard 200 and the fourth to top the R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts. TP-2.com yielded the hits "I Wish" (U.S. Hot 100: #14, U.S. R&B: #1), "Feelin' On Yo Booty" (U.S. R&B: #9), and the remix to "Fiesta" (U.S. Hot 100: #6, U.S. R&B: #1), which featured Jay-Z. In 2001, Kelly won the Outstanding Achievement Award at the MOBO Awards and Billboard magazine ranked TP-2.com at number 94 on the magazine's Top 200 Albums of the Decade. "The World's Greatest", from the Ali soundtrack, was a hit, and Kelly performed at the opening ceremonies of the Winter Olympics.  In 2001, Kelly began discussing the possibility of a joint album with Jay-Z after the positive reception of Jay-Z's "Guilty Until Proven Innocent", which featured Kelly and the remix to "Fiesta" which featured Jay-Z. In December 2001 at the Billboard Music Awards, Kelly confirmed the album's existence and announced the title of the album, The Best of Both Worlds. During this time, Kelly began working on the follow-up to his fifth studio album TP-2.com, titled Loveland.On January 24, 2002, at the press conference announcing the The Best of Both Worlds completion, celebrities such as Johnnie Cochran, Russell Simmons, Ronald Isley and Sean Combs lined up to praise the album, with Jay-Z stating that he hoped the collaboration represents "more unity for black people on a whole."    Black Electorate described the collaboration as "one of the greatest power moves in black music history."  MTV's Shaheem Reid wrote: "And if Jay and Kelly can put their egos to the side long enough to wrap up and promote their album, then their labels — Def Jam and Jive, respectively — can surely figure out a way to join forces and make cheddar together. As determined by a coin toss, the album will be distributed on Roc-A-Fella/Def Jam in the U.S. and Canada, while Jive will handle distribution internationally." When the joint album leaked on February 22, 2002 it caused the label, Roc-A-Fella, to push the album's release date up from the initial date, March 26, to March 19.       Jay-Z expressed his frustration about the album leak to MTV News: "It's the gift and the curse. It's an honor that everybody wants your music fast, but on the other hand, it's another thing when the music gets out before you [want it to]. Because that's your art. You feel attached to it. You feel a certain way and you want people to go out and support it. The time that you take, it's like a piece of your life. You take parts of your life and you put it on these records and then for it to just be traded and moved around [is frustrating]. The release date for The Best of Both Worlds was eventually moved back to the initial date March 26. The album sold 285,000 copies in its opening week and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. In May 2002, Kelly's initial sixth studio album, Loveland, leaked and was delayed to release in November.  Instead Kelly re-recorded the entire album, titled it Chocolate Factory and featured several of the bootlegged tracks on the bonus Loveland disc.
2003–05: Chocolate Factory, Happy People/U Saved Me and TP.3 ReloadedIn early 2003, Chocolate Factory became a runaway success for Kelly, selling over three million copies due to the success of singles such as "Ignition". "Snake" and "Step in the Name of Love" were also popular singles. "Snake", incidentally, became the basis of the dancehall reggae riddim known as Baghdad. Later that year Kelly followed that success by releasing his first greatest hits collection The R in R&B Collection Volume 1, the album as well as a DVD collection.In 2004, Kelly released the ambitious two-disc set Happy People/U Saved Me, with the first disc including feel-good, stepping-inspired tracks, while focusing on gospel and inspirational material on the second disc. That same year, Kelly performed The Star-Spangled Banner during the introduction of the world championship boxing fight between Bernard Hopkins and Jermain Taylor. His performance, which included a line of dancers doing the "stepping" routine and a prerecorded instrumental track set to the sound of "Happy People" was met with a mixed reaction. In October 2004, Kelly reunited with Jay-Z to do a follow-up to their Best of Both Worlds album shortly after announcing a tour to coincide with the project after the duo performed at Madison Square Garden a year before. The duo's Unfinished Business album was released and peaked at number one on the Billboard chart.The Unfinished Business tour was plagued by a rivalry between the two stars and Kelly reportedly showing up late or not at all to gigs. The singer, according to Jay-Z, often complained that the touring lights were not directed towards him and often left during the middle of sets. Another night during the concert, Kelly stayed on his tour bus for two hours before finally coming out to perform an uninspired set. Jay-Z eventually removed R. Kelly halfway through the tour, after a member of Jay-Z's entourage attacked R. Kelly with Mace or pepper spray. On April 25, 2006, it was confirmed that Jay-Z's younger cousin, Tyran (Ty-Ty) Smith confessed in a Manhattan Criminal Court to pepper-spraying R. Kelly and four of his bodyguards at Madison Square Garden in October 2004. Smith had been charged with assault, but was allowed to plead guilty to disorderly conduct for four days of community service. After the original incident, Jay-Z made Smith an executive of Def Jam Records.  Kelly also launched a $75 million lawsuit against Jay-Z for removing him from the tour, which received a countersuit by Jay-Z which was thrown out by the judge. In 2005, Kelly released his seventh studio LP, TP.3 Reloaded. The album included chapters of "Trapped in the Closet".
2007–09: Double Up and UntitledOn May 29, 2007, R Kelly released his eighth studio album Double Up, which included the hit single "I'm a Flirt (Remix)", featuring T.I. and T-Pain. The original track entitled "I'm a Flirt", also produced and co-written by R. Kelly, appeared as a hidden track on Bow Wow's The Price of Fame (2006). However, Kelly never gave the rights for the song to be released as a formal single, although it was played by many radio stations before the remix version. Kelly's first single from Double Up was "I'm a Flirt (Remix)", Bow Wow was not featured on this version of the song. In Kelly's video for "I'm a Flirt (Remix)", he encourages fans to call a number which flashes up quickly on the screen. Fans who called the number were greeted by a recording of Kelly talking about his upcoming album and playing snippets of new songs in the studio. "I'm a Flirt (Remix)" was successful for Kelly. The song peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100. It also reached number one on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks. Another hit on the album, "Same Girl", was a collaboration between Kelly and Usher. The single peaked at number 20 on the Hot 100 and peaked at number four on the R&B chart. Other singles such as "Rock Star" featuring Ludacris and Kid Rock, "Sex Planet" and "Freaky in the Club" were R&B charters, although the latter two were not officially released as singles, nor was the title track featuring Snoop Dogg.Kelly's other single from Double Up titled "Rise Up" was a tribute to the victims of the Virginia Tech massacre. The song was officially released as a digital download May 15, 2007. Proceeds were donated to the Hokie Spirit Memorial Fund, a fund that helped family members of the victims of the shootings. Kelly began his Double Up tour with Ne-Yo, Keyshia Cole and J. Holiday opening for him. After two shows, promoter Leonard Rowe had Ne-Yo removed from the tour because of a contract dispute. However, Ne-Yo alleges that the reason for the dropout was because Ne-Yo believes he received a better response from critics and fans, even though he only performed at two shows. Ne-Yo filed a lawsuit against Rowe Entertainment. It was shown that Kelly was not mentioned in the lawsuit. In December 2007, Kelly was showing up to another preliminary court hearing on his case due to his tour bus being held up in Utah.  The judge threatened to revoke Kelly's bond, but the judge eventually decided not to. In 2008, Kelly released a rap track titled "I'm a Beast" in which he coarsely attacked his detractors, though Kelly himself never mentioned by name whom the song was directed to. In 2008, Billboard reported that Kelly had plans to release his newest album titled 12 Play: Fourth Quarter in the summer of that year but the album was postponed. Billboard also named Kelly among the most successful artists ever for its 50th Anniversary List.  In the spring, the first promotional single "Hair Braider", peaked at No. 56 on Billboard's R&B chart. On July 28, the entire album leaked online.  The album was then pushed back to be released in the fall. On September 18, Kelly released the video to the second promotional single "Skin". However, the album still has no official release date. Though Kelly has not released an album, he has kept busy in the studio doing featured guest spots on numerous remixes including "Lookin Boy" remix by Hotstylz, Mariah Carey's "Touch My Body" remix, a verse for a remix to Kanye West's single "Love Lockdown", Raheem DeVaughn's "Customer" remix, Beyoncé Knowles' "If I Were a Boy" remix, T-Pain's "Chopped 'n' Skrewed" remix, among others. A recent track was leaked on the internet titled "I Believe". Kelly states on his official MySpace page that Obama's election inspired him to write the song, which contains an excerpt from Barack Obama's presidential acceptance speech. This song was available on iTunes as a free download the first week it was released.On June 3, 2009, Kelly released his first ever mixtape, The Demo Tape (Gangsta Grillz) presented by DJ Skee and DJ Drama as a way to reintroduce himself to fans. While at the Velvet Room in Atlanta in February 2009, Kelly announced that he was out there working on the album and that it would be called Untitled.  The album was given a September 29, 2009 release date,  but was delayed until October 13, 2009. The album release was again delayed and was released under Jive Records on December 1, 2009. It got mixed to positive reviews from critics. The single "Number One", which features Keri Hilson, peaked at #8 on the US R&B Chart.Kelly performed for the first time in Africa headlining the Arise African Fashion Awards in Johannesburg, South Africa on June 20, 2009.  Kelly scheduled to perform in Cape Town before heading to Nigeria as part of the annual ThisDay music and fashion festival in July. Kelly also performed in Kampala, Uganda in January 2010. He also scheduled to perform in London as part of his first international tour in eight years, but he did not make his London concert. "I'm very excited about my first visit to Africa, I've dreamed about this for a long time and it's finally here," Kelly said in a statement. "It will be one of the highlights of not only my career but my life. I can't wait to perform in front of my fans in Africa — who have been some of the best in the world." In December 2009, Kelly teamed up with biographer David Ritz and Tavis Smiley's SmileyBooks publications to write his memoirs entitled Soulacoaster. SmileyBooks publisher and founder, Tavis Smiley stated that the memoir's main focus won't be on Kelly's trials and tribulations. Smiley was quoted saying "If anyone thinks this bookis going to fixate on [R. Kelly's trials], they are going to be sadly mistaken. It is going to be a holistic look at his life thus far and the life and legacy that he's building." 
2010: Epic and Love LetterKelly performed the inspirational song "Sign of a Victory" at the 2010 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony on June 11, 2010. On July 13, 2010, a song called "Tongues" surfaced, reportedly the lead single from Kelly's upcoming album Zodiac. The song is produced by Bangladesh and features Ludacris. In an interview in the September 2010 issue of XXL magazine, Kelly mentioned that he is currently working on three new albums (Epic, Love Letter, and Zodiac) and detailed that the new material is basically him "remixing himself". On September 13, 2010, Kelly released one of his three new albums, Epic. A collection of Kelly's most "epic" ballads, including five brand-new inspirational songs; the compilation was only released in Europe. In the September 2010 issue of XXL magazine, Kelly mentioned that the song Sign of Victory gave him the idea to do an international album called Epic.In November 2010, Kelly collaborated with several African musicians forming a supergroup known as One8. The group features 2Face from Nigeria, Alikiba from Tanzania, Congolese singer Fally Ipupa, 4X4 from Ghana, hip-hop artist Movaizhaleine from Gabon, Zambia's JK, Ugandan hip-hop star Navio and Kenya's Amani, the only female in the group. The first release from the group is "Hands Across the World" written and produced by Kelly.  Kelly's latest album Love Letter was released on December 14, 2010 worldwide. The album includes 15 songs, the latter being a bonus track; a cover of Michael Jackson's You Are Not Alone, which was written and produced by Kelly as well. Love Letter has been critically acclaimed by music critics and highly-praised by critics and fans alike. ABC News declared "The genius of R. Kelly has been resurrected and is on full display on Love Letter"  The first single "When a Woman Loves" was nominated for a Grammy for Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards. ABC News music critic named "When a Woman Loves" the best single of 2010 saying: "An absolutely stunning love song with a pitch-perfect vocal performance that will send chills down your spine — for the right reasons."  The next single, "Love Letter" and "A Love Letter Christmas", the Christmas remix to "Love Letter", were released as singles on November 22, 2010. In promotion of the Love Letter album he performed at the 2010 Soul Train Music Awards and on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon. All songs on the album were written and produced by Kelly.
2011: Throat surgeryOn February 12 at the 2011 Clive Davis Pre-Grammy Gala in Los Angeles, Kelly performed a medley of hits including Happy People, When a Woman's Fed Up and Bump N' Grind, which brought Usher, Mary J. Blige and Katy Perry to their feet.  Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times wrote "Kelly is a single-bound kind of leaper who dips into everything from soft porn to opera in his music. His supreme chutzpah, a quality he shares with Streisand, allows him to feel secure within pop's traditions while taking them wherever he pleases. He made Davis' musical program, which at times got lost amid the chatter of the A-list crowd, come alive. It was all so simple then: an instant when one of pop's key traditional elements, that determination to wow, took on new dimension in the hands of an expert." In March 2011, Kelly was named the #1 R&B artist of the last 25 years by Billboard.  In his career Kelly has amassed 35 top 10 hits and 11 #1 hits on the R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.On July 19, 2011, Kelly was rushed to the Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago to undergo emergency throat surgery. He cancelled his heavily advertised performance at the Reggae Sumfest in Jamaica that was scheduled the following Friday. In a statement the organizers said, "Kelly's unforeseen and unavoidable health issues will prevent him from making a scheduled appearance on the music festival." Johnny Gourzong, Sumfest Productions executive director, also commented, saying, "We are truly going to miss his presence on the festival."  On July 20, 2011, in a press release, representatives for R. Kelly explained that he was rushed to the hospital to drain an abscess on one of his tonsils and "will be laid up for an indefinite amount of time".  Shortly after, Kelly tweeted fans "I WILL BE BACK!" he promised and "I'd like to thank everybody for their love, concern and support."  On July 21, 2011, Kelly's spokesman, Allan Mayer, reported that Kelly was released from Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago and is recuperating at home. It was not immediately clear when Kelly might be well enough to resume performing.  On July 21, 2011, in a video message to fans, Kelly spoke out for the first time since throat surgery and reassured his fans that he's doing well. He said "Yo what's up, y'all, it's your boy Kellz, fresh out the hospital. Just want to say thanks to my fans for supporting me. I want to say thanks to all the prayer warriors out there for supporting me." On September 23, 2011, Variety confirmed that Kelly has signed on to write original music for the Sparkle soundtrack.  On April 25, 2011, Director Salkim Akli was quoted saying, "Hopefully, R. Kelly will come on and do some of the music for the film. His latest music sounds like it came from a time period. Here's a guy who can write about a woman being a jeep to 'I Believe I Can Fly' and he's an artist. Whether you like him or dislike him, I love artists, and I know that he will just go deep into it and come up with something unique." On October 7, RCA Music Group announced it was disbanding Jive Records along with Arista Records and J Records. With the shutdown, Kelly (and all other artists previously signed to these three labels) will release his future material on the RCA Records brand.  On November 10, 2011, Kelly tweeted to fans "It's been a long time coming but I finally feel a lot better about my throat since the surgery and this is the first song I wrote."  followed with "Enjoy!" and a link to a song titled "Shut Up". In the song, Kelly addresses the people who doubted his ability to comeback after the surgery and the rumors that surrounded him while he was in recovery. Reviews for "Shut Up" were generally positive: Spin (magazine) wrote, "Kelly taking aim at the haters who said "he's washed up, he's lost it." He hasn't. Dude's voice is in prime smooth R&B form".  Prefix (magazine) writer, Andrew Winistorfer described the song as "vintage Kelly: It's all runs in the verses, falsetto in the middle, and randomly placed vitriol. On December 21, 2011, Kelly made a live appearance on The X Factor (U.S.) and gave his first performance since undergoing emergency throat surgery in the summer. He sang his classic hit "I Believe I Can Fly" with finalist Melanie Amaro and received positive reviews from critics. Kelly revealed to Rolling Stone that he felt like he was "just starting out" and how the performance was a "wake up call" for him. His memoir entitled Soulacoaster was released in the Summer of 2012.
2012–present: Write Me Back and Trapped in the Closet RevivalOn January 31, 2012, Kelly revealed in a radio interview that he's releasing a follow-up to the Love Letter album titled Write Me Back. The album is a mix of Kelly's previous albums; Love Letter, Happy People and a little bit of TP-2.Com.  On February 1, 2012, Kelly released the first single, "Share My Love", off Write Me Back, followed by “Feelin’ Single”. The album will be released on June 26. On February 18, 2012, R. Kelly performed at Whitney Houston's memorial. Kelly performed the ballad I Look to You, a song he wrote for Whitney that she released on July 23, 2009. The song was included in her seventh and final studio album, also titled I Look to You. After singing the song he said, "We love you Whitney. Rest in Peace." before leaving the stage. On March 20, 2012, IFC announced a third installment of the Trapped in the Closet will be coming soon. On June 26, 2012, Kelly released his eleventh studio album, Write Me Back.On August 31, 2012, Kelly announced The Single Ladies Tour featuring R&B singer, Tamia. On September 1, 2012, the Japanese branch of retail chain HMV revealed Kanye West's Cruel Summer track list. Kelly is featured alongside Kanye West on the opening song entitled "To The World". 
Personal lifeRobert Kelly, the third of four children, grew up in a single parent home. Kelly was raised in the church, where he sang gospel in the choir.  His mother, Joanne, died in 1993.Kelly has three children: Two daughters, Joann (born 1998) and Jaya (born 2000), and a son Robert Jr. (born 2002). In 1996, Kelly married Andrea Kelly, his former backup dancer and children's mother. In January 2009, after almost 13 years of marriage, the couple divorced. 
Legal issuesAfter a July 1996 brawl at a Lafayette, Louisiana health club involving bodyguard William Robert Savy, Kelly was placed on a year's unsupervised probation starting August 13, 1997. One of the victims, Christopher Mahoney, needed 110 facial stitches. Kelly was arrested on April 8, 1998 on three misdemeanor charges of disorderly conduct, including one charge on violating noise ordinance for playing loud music from his car.  Prosecutors from the district attorney's office dropped the first two charges on May 7 and the noise charge on July 22 that year.  On February 3, 2002, a video allegedly showing Kelly engaging in sex with, and urinating on, an allegedly underage woman surfaced. The story, which was released by an unknown source, was sent to the Chicago Sun-Times, the newspaper that broke the story. Kelly denied that he was the man in the video.    Bootleg copies of that tape became widely available on the black market and over file sharing networks.  In June 2002, Kelly was indicted in Chicago on 21 counts of having sex with a minor, which were later reduced to soliciting a minor for child pornography, seven counts of videotaping the acts, and seven counts of producing child pornography.  That same month, authorities searched Kelly's house in Davenport, Florida. Officers found an unusual amount of commercially manufactured and distributed adult porn in a room.    During the search officers also obtained pictures of an allegedly underage woman on a digital camera – wrapped in a towel in a duffel bag.  Kelly was arrested in January 2003 on those charges. In March 2004, these charges were dropped due to a lack of probable cause for the search warrants. After a number of delays, on October 27, 2006, a Cook County, Illinois court hearing for pre-trial motions set the date of the actual trial to February 7, 2007.  On the date of the trial, Kelly's lawyer informed the court that his client was unable to attend because he was "undergoing surgery for a burst appendix". He also announced that Kelly was "in good condition and was expected to be released from the hospital later in the day." Kelly's attorney stated that Kelly (who pleaded not guilty) would be in attendance on the next trial date of February 21, 2007.  It had previously been announced by the court that the videotape that allegedly showed Kelly performing sex acts with an underage woman would be publicly shown as evidence in the trial. The trial, however, was delayed due to disputes over when the tape was made and to give medical recuperation time to the sitting judge following a fall resulting in broken bones. Later the case was set for a September 17 date.  It took more than six months for the case to go to trial. Jury selection began on May 9, 2008, and the trial officially started on May 20 with opening statements from the prosecution and defense. After two weeks, the prosecution's case wrapped on June 3 while the defense's wrapped six days later, on June 9. After less than a day of deliberations, on June 13, 2008, a Chicago jury found Kelly not guilty of all 14 counts. 
Artistry 
Musical styleLike Marvin Gaye and Al Green, Kelly melds the sinful and the sanctified in his music. He’s most known for his explicit carnality. Kelly is often compared to Marvin Gaye and is viewed as his contemporary equivalent. He often cites Donny Hathaway, Stevie Wonder and Sam Cooke as his influences.
InfluenceSince childhood, Kelly has been influenced by R&B and Soul artists such as Donny Hathaway, Stevie Wonder, and Sam Cooke. Gospel also plays a major part in Kelly's music, he grew up in a storefront church and drew inspiration from there. Joann, Kelly's mother, often would ask Kelly to sing Hathaway's "A Song For You" over and over. Kelly cites Marvin Gaye, Donny Hathaway, Stevie Wonder and The Isley Brother's for influencing his work.
LegacyKelly is considered to be the most successful R&B artist of the last 25 years.    He is also one of the best-selling music artists in the United States with 38.5 million albums sold as well as only the fifth black artist to crack the top 50 of the same list.    Rolling Stone magazine wrote: "Arguably the most important R&B figure of the of the 1990s and 2000s".  Music executive Barry Weiss described Kelly as "The modern-day Prince, although there's a bit of Marvin Gaye in him, and a bit of Irving Berlin."   
Discography 
 
 

Studio
Born into the 90's (1992) (with Public Announcement)
12 Play (1993)
R. Kelly (1995)
R. (1998)
TP-2.com (2000)
Chocolate Factory (2003)
Happy People/U Saved Me (2004)
TP.3 Reloaded (2005)
Double Up (2007)
Untitled (2009)
Love Letter (2010)
Write Me Back (2012)
Black Panties (2013)

 

Collaboration albums
The Best of Both Worlds (2002) (with Jay-Z)
Unfinished Business (2004) (with Jay-Z)



Compilation albums
The R. In R&B Collection, Vol. 1 (2003)
Remix City, Volume 1 (2005)
My Diary (2005)
Playlist: The Very Best of R. Kelly (2010)
Epic (2010)



Unreleased albums
Loveland (2002)
12 Play: 4th Quarter (2008)

 
Filmography


Trapped in the Closet (1–12) (2005)
Trapped in the Closet (13–22) (2007)
Trapped in the Closet (1–22) The Big Package (2007)
R. Kelly Live the Light It Up Tour (2007)
Trapped in the Closet (22–54) (TBA)


Official tours

The 12 Play Very Necessary Tour (w/ Salt-N-Pepa) (1994)
The Down Low Top Secret Tour (w/ LL Cool J, Xscape, and Solo) (1996)
The Get Up on a Room Tour (w/ Kelly Price, Nas, Foxy Brown, and Deborah Cox) (1999)
The TP-2.com Tour (w/ Sunshine Anderson & Syleena Johnson) (2001)
The Key in the Ignition Tour (w/ Ashanti (entertainer)) (2003)
The Light It Up Tour (2006)
The Double Up Tour (w/ J. Holiday & Keyshia Cole) (2007)
The Ladies Make Some Noise Tour (2009)
Love Letter Tour (w/ Keyshia Cole & Marsha Ambrosius) (2011)
The Single Ladies Tour (w/ Tamia) (2012)


Grammy AwardsThe Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. R. Kelly has won 3 awards from 23 nominations. 
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 1996
| "You Are Not Alone"  (Michael Jackson's song) 
| Song of The Year
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="5"| 1998
| rowspan="5"| "I Believe I Can Fly"
| Record of the Year
|  
|-
| Song of the Year
|  
|-
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| Best R&B Song
|  
|-
| Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="2"| 1999
| "I'm Your Angel"  (with Celine Dion) 
| Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals
|  
|-
| "Lean On Me"
| Best R&B Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="3"| 2000
| "When a Woman's Fed Up"
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| R.
| Best R&B Album
|  
|-
| "Satisfy You"  (with Puff Daddy) 
| Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2001
| "I Wish"
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2003
| "The World's Greatest"
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="2"| 2004
| "Step in the Name of Love"
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| Chocolate Factory
| Best Contemporary R&B Album
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2005
| "Happy People"
| Best Male R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;"| 2006
| Trapped in the Closet
| Best Long Form Music Video
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="2"| 2008
| "Same Girl"  (with Usher) 
| Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals
|  
|-
| Trapped in The Closet Chapter 13-22
| Best Long Form Music Video
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="2"| 2011
| "When a Woman Loves"
| Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance
|  
|-
| Untitled
| Best Contemporary R&B Album
|  
|-
| style="text-align:center;" rowspan="2"| 2012
| "Radio Message"
| Best Traditional R&B Performance
|  
|-
| Love Letter
| Best R&B Album
|  
|-
 
Other Awards

American Music Award
1993: Favorite Soul/R&B Single ("Honey Love")
1995: Favorite Soul/R&B Album (12 Play)
1997: Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist
2000: Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist
2005: Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist
2007: Favorite Soul/R&B Album (Double Up)



BET Awards
2003: Best Male R&B Artist



Billboard Awards
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Artist
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Album (TP2.com)
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Singles & Tracks ("Fiesta")
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Artist
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Album Artist
2001: Top R&B/Hip Hop Album Artist – Male



BMI Awards
1998: Pop Songwriter of the Year (for "I Believe I Can Fly", "I Can't Sleep Baby (If I)", and "I Don't Want To" (recorded by Toni Braxton))



Grammy Awards
1998: Best R&B Song ("I Believe I Can Fly")
1998: Best Male R&B Vocal Performance ("I Believe I Can Fly")
1998: Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media ("I Believe I Can Fly")



MOBO Awards
2001: MOBO Outstanding Achievement



NAACP Image Awards
2001: Outstanding Male Artist
2001: Outstanding Music Video ("I Wish")



Soul Train Awards
1999: Best R&B/Soul Album, Male (R.)
1999: Sammy Davis Jr. Entertainer of the Year Award
2000: Best R&B/Soul or Rap Album (R.)
2001: Best R&B/Soul Single, Male ("I Wish")
2001: Best R&B/Soul Album, Male (TP2.com)
2004: R&B/Soul Album, Male (Chocolate Factory)
2004: Quincy Jones Award for Outstanding Career Achievements
2006: Stevie Wonder Award for Outstanding Achievements in Song Writing



Source Hip Hop Awards
1999: R&B Artist of the Year
2001: R&B Artist of the Year



Vibe Awards
2003: R&B Vanguard Award

  
References 
External links 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFAULTSORT















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Gwen Verdon
 Gwenyth Evelyn “Gwen” Verdon (January 13, 1925 – October 18, 2000) was an actress and dancer who won four Tony awards for her musical comedy performances and served as uncredited choreographers assistant and specialty dance coach for both theater and film.  With flaming red hair and an endearing quaver in her voice, Verdon was a critically acclaimed performer on Broadway in the 1950s and 1960s. Having originated many roles in musicals she is also strongly identified with her second husband, director–choreographer Bob Fosse, remembered as the dancer–collaborator–muse for whom he choreographed much of his work and as the guardian of his legacy after his death.
Early life and careerVerdon was born in Culver City, California, the second child of Gertrude Lilian (  Standring; October 24, 1896 – October 16, 1956) and Joseph William Verdon (December 31, 1896 – June 23, 1978), who were British immigrants to the United States by way of Canada.  Her brother was William Farrell Verdon (August 1, 1923 – June 10, 1991). The Verdon family could be described as "showpeople." Her father was an electrician at MGM Studios, and her mother was a former vaudevillian of the Denishawn dance troupe, as well as a dance teacher. As a toddler, Gwen had rickets, which left her legs so badly misshapen she was called "Gimpy" by other children and spent her early years in orthopedic boots and rigid leg braces. Her mother put the three-year-old in dance classes. Further ballet training strengthened her legs and improved her carriage.By the time she was six, she was already dancing on stage. She went on to study multiple dance forms, ranging from tap, jazz, ballroom and flamenco to Balinese. She even added juggling to her repertoire. At age 11, she appeared as a solo ballerina in the musical romance film The King Steps Out (1936), directed by Josef von Sternberg and starring Grace Moore and Franchot Tone. She attended Hamilton High School in Los Angeles and studied under famed balletomane Ernest Belcher. While in high school, she was cast in a revival of Show Boat.Verdon shocked her parents and instructors when she abandoned her budding career aged 17 to elope with reporter James Henaghan in 1942. In 1945, she appeared as a dancer in the movie musical The Blonde From Brooklyn. After her divorce, she entrusted her son Jimmy to the care of her parents.
Adult career 
Early on, Verdon found a job as assistant to choreographer Jack Cole, whose work was respected by both Broadway and Hollywood movie studios. During her five-year employment with Cole, she took small roles in movie musicals as a "specialty dancer". She also taught dance to performers who eventually became stars, such as Jane Russell, Fernando Lamas, Lana Turner, Rita Hayworth, Betty Grable and Marilyn Monroe.Verdon started out on Broadway as a "gypsy", going from one chorus line to another. Her breakthrough role finally came when choreographer Michael Kidd cast her as the second female lead in Cole Porter's musical Can-Can (1953), starring French prima donna Lilo. Out-of-town reviewers hailed Verdon's interpretation of Eve in the Garden of Eden ballet as a performance that upstaged the show's star, who jealously demanded Verdon's role be cut to only two featured dance numbers. With her role reduced to little more than an ensemble part, Verdon formally announced her intention to quit by the time the show premiered on Broadway. But her opening-night Garden of Eden performance was so well received that the audience screamed her name until the startled actress was brought from her dressing room in her bathrobe to take a curtain call. Verdon received a pay increase and her first Tony Award for her triumphant performance.With her short shock of flaming red hair, exquisite body of a pin-up girl and a guileless vulnerability on stage and off, Verdon was considered the best dancer on Broadway in the 1950s and 1960s. That reputation solidified during her next show, George Abbott's Damn Yankees (1955), based on the novel The Year the Yankees Lost the Pennant. She would forever be identified with her role as the vampish Lola, and it was on this show that she first worked with Bob Fosse as her choreographer. In the story, Verdon's Lola is a woman who was once "the ugliest woman in Providence, Rhode Island" but sold herself to the Devil to be the beauty we see in the play. The Devil (played by a wryly comic Ray Walston) convinces a baseball fan to sell his soul so he can play and win the World Series for the Washington Senators. The Devil then employs the seductive Lola to keep the guy ("Joe") from escaping his grasp. The hitch is that Lola falls for the guy and has to choose between her love for him and her beauty pact with the Devil. The musical ran for 1019 performances. Vernon won another Tony and went to Hollywood to repeat her role in the 1958 movie version Damn Yankees, memorably singing "whatever Lola wants, Lola gets". (Fosse can be seen partnered deliciously with her in the witty mambo duet "Who's Got the Pain".)Another Tony came when Verdon memorably played a role associated with Greta Garbo, Eugene O'Neill's Anna Christie, the hard-luck girl fleeing from her past as a prostitute, in the musical New Girl in Town. When Fosse directed as well as choreographed his first Broadway musical, it was Redhead. In 1960, Fosse and Verdon wed.In 1966, Verdon returned to the stage in the role of Charity in Sweet Charity, which like many of her earlier Broadway triumphs was choreographed and directed by husband Fosse. The show is based on Federico Fellini's screenplay for Nights of Cabiria. But whereas Fellini's black-and-white Italian film concerns the romantic ups and downs of an ever-hopeful prostitute, the musical makes the central character a hoofer-for-hire at a Times Square dance hall. The trademark Fosse showmanship, a dynamite musical score and theatregoers' affection for the exuberant, 41-year-old Verdon put the show over, despite Fellini's source material straining against the sanitized, Broadway-ized storyline. It was followed by a movie version starring  Shirley MacLaine as Charity, featuring Ricardo Montalban, Sammy Davis, Jr. and Chita Rivera, with Fosse at the helm of his very first film as director and choreographer. Characteristically generous, Verdon helped with the choreography. The numbers include the famed "Big Spender", the fast-paced "Rhythm of Life", the witty "If My Friends Could See Me Now" and "I'm a Brass Band", in which MacLaine's Charity marched down the middle of Manhattan's Wall Street district. Verdon would also travel to Berlin to help Fosse with Cabaret, the musical film for which he won an Academy Award for Best Director.Although estranged as a couple, Verdon and Fosse continued to collaborate on projects such as Chicago (1975) (in which she originated the role of murderess Roxie Hart) and the musical Dancin' (1978), as well as Fosse's autobiographical movie All That Jazz (1979). The helpmeet/peer played by Leland Palmer in that film is based on the role Verdon played in Fosse's real life.  She also developed a close working relationship with Fosse's lover, Broadway dancer Ann Reinking, and she instructed for Reinking's musical theatre classes. Reinking can be seen in All That Jazz playing the protagonist's lover, as she was in Fosse's real life. She, as much as Verdon, would become responsible for keeping Fosse's trademark choreography alive after Fosse's death. Reinking played Roxie Hart in the highly successful Broadway revival of Chicago that opened in 1996. She choreographed the dances "in the style of Bob Fosse" for that revival.After originating the role of Roxie opposite Chita Rivera in Chicago, Verdon focused on film acting, playing character roles in movies such as The Cotton Club (1984), Cocoon (1985) and Cocoon: The Return (1988). She continued to teach dance and musical theater and to act. She receiving three Emmy Award nominations for appearances on Magnum, P.I. (1988), Dream On (1993) and Homicide: Life on the Street (1993). Verdon appeared as Alice's mother in the Woody Allen movie Alice (1990) and as Ruth in Marvin's Room (1996), co-starring Meryl Streep, Diane Keaton, and Hume Cronyn. In 1999, Verdon served as artistic consultant on a plotless Broadway musical designed to showcase examples of classic Fosse choreography.  Called simply Fosse, the revue was conceived and directed by Richard Maltby Jr and Ann Reinking and choreographed by Reinking and Chet Walker. Verdon's daughter Nicole received a "special thanks" credit. The show received a Tony for best musical.Verdon played Alora in the movie Walking Across Egypt (1999) and appeared in the film Bruno, released in 2000.Verdon received a total of four Tonys, for best supporting actress for Can-Can (1953) and best leading actress for Damn Yankees (1955), New Girl in Town (1957) and Redhead (1959), a murder-mystery musical. She also won a Grammy Award for the cast recording of Redhead.Gwen Verdon was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame in 1981.  In 1998, she was awarded the National Medal of Arts. 
Personal lifeVerdon had two husbands, tabloid reporter James Henaghan (married 1942, divorced 1947) and Bob Fosse (married 1960, his death 1987). She and Henaghan had one son, Jim Henaghan (born 1943); she and Fosse had a daughter, Nicole Fosse (born 1963).In 1971, Verdon filed a legal separation from Fosse (but never divorced) because of his extramarital affairs. She held him in her arms as he suffered a fatal heart attack on the sidewalk outside the Washington theatre where Sweet Charity  Berkvist, Robert."Gwen Verdon, Redhead Who High-Kicked Her Way to Stardom, Dies at 75,"The New York Times, originally published October 19, 2000, accessed June 4, 2009   was being revived.She was a cat fancier, and had up to six cats at one time, with names such as "Feets Fosse", "Junie Moon", and "Tidbits Tumbler Fosse". Verdon died in her sleep in 2000 of a heart attack at the home of her daughter, Nicole, in Woodstock, Vermont,  at the age of 75. At 8 p.m. on the night she died, all marquee lights on Broadway were dimmed in a tribute to the actress.  She was cremated.
Work 
 
Filmography

The King Steps Out (1936)
The Blonde from Brooklyn (1945)
On the Riviera (1951)
David and Bathsheba (1951)
Meet Me After the Show (1951)
Dreamboat (1952)
The I Don't Care Girl (1953)
The Mississippi Gambler (1953)
The Farmer Takes a Wife (1953)
Gentlemen Marry Brunettes (1955) (scenes deleted)
Damn Yankees (1958)
Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1978) (Cameo)
Creepshow (1982) (voice only)
Legs (1983)
The Cotton Club (1984)
Sanford Meisner: The American Theatre's Best Kept Secret (1985)
Cocoon (1985)
Nadine (1987)
Cocoon: The Return (1988)
Marvin's Room (1996)
In Cold Blood (TV) (1996)
 
Stage

The Red Mill (1940) (Los Angeles Civic Light Opera)
Bonanza Bound (1947) (closed on the road)
Alive and Kicking (1950) (Broadway)
Can-Can (1953) (Broadway)
Damn Yankees (1955) (Broadway)
New Girl In Town (1957) (Broadway)
Redhead (1959) (Broadway and national tour)
Sweet Charity (1966) (Broadway)
Children! Children! (1972) (Broadway)
Chicago (1975) (Broadway and national tour)
 
References 
External links

 
 

 
 
  
DEFAULTSORT















 
 
 
 
 
	Hans Janmaat
 Johannes Gerardus Hendrikus "Hans" Janmaat (November 3, 1934 – June 9, 2002) was a Dutch politician of the Centre Party (CP) and later his own formed Centre Democrats (CD). He was Parliamentary leader of the Centre Party in the House of Representatives from September 16, 1982 until October 15, 1984 when he was expelled from the party. He later served as Parliamentary leader of the Centre Democrats in the House of Representatives from September 8, 1989 until May 19, 1998 when his party lost all its seats. Although he was widely known, he was never a major force in the Dutch political landscape,    partly because of a cordon sanitaire imposed by the Third Lubbers cabinet.
Biography
Early lifeJohannes Gerardus Hendrikus Janmaat was born on November 3, 1934 in Nes aan de Amstel in North Holland, as the oldest of nine children in a traditional Roman Catholic family.  His father was a salesman and insurance broker. When Janmaat was 4 years old, the family moved to Gouda, where it would endure the war years in relative peace. 
After graduating in 1954, Janmaat started a study in aeronautical engineering, but had to drop out two years later after his father could no longer afford the tuition fees.  Having to give up his studies to work was the first of many setbacks he would often refer to later in life. In 1966 he married Belgian Evi Hock, having met her while working in Germany.  In 1979, they divorced. In 1996, Janmaat married Wil Schuurman. No children were born in either marriage. In the early 1960s, Janmaat ran a furniture factory with two of his brothers, but it burned down in 1966. He used the insurance payout to study politicology at the University of Amsterdam.  Fellow-students found him ambitious, provocative and witty.  In 1969, he participated in the occupation of the Maagdenhuis, the university's administrative center, as part of a student protest.  He completed his studies in 1972.
PoliticsAfter graduating, Janmaat held part-time positions as a teacher of civics. He also ran a one-man consultancy for small businesses.In 1972, he joined the Catholic People's Party (KVP).  He also worked in several commissions for the Democratic Socialists '70 (DS'70) party. Despite his efforts, he was not considered suitable for a front line position because of his capriciousness and tendency to go against the grain. In the 1970s, he became more interested in the emerging issue of immigration as large numbers of foreign workers came to the Netherlands. His increasingly radical stance lead to a break with the KVP as well as DS'70. In 1980, he read an article in Vrij Nederland which drew his attention to the recently founded extreme-right Centre Party (CP). After several interviews, he joined the party as its seventh member.  Starting as a publicity worker, he would rapidly rise to be the party's top and was its lijsttrekker (top candidate) for the 1982 elections. The party won a single seat in the House of Representatives, which went to Janmaat.  Other political parties largely ignored and ostracized him. 
Centre DemocratsAfter disagreements and a power struggle with other members of the Centrum Party, he was expelled from the CP in October 1984. However, he retained his seat in parliament, in accordance with Dutch law. Janmaat officially launched his own party, the Centre Democrats (CD) in November 1984.  Politically, the party did not differ greatly from the CP, except that it was strongly centered around Janmaat, to prevent another power struggle.  Several attempts were made to reconcile the differences between CP and CD. One such meeting in a hotel in Kedichem was disrupted by left-wing activists, who set fire to the building. Janmaat narrowly escaped with his life, CD secretary (and later wife of Janmaat) Wil Schuurman lost a leg because of injuries sustained jumping out of a window to escape the fire. In the 1986 election, Janmaat lost his seat in parliament, however he regained his single seat in 1989.His biggest political success would be in the 1994 elections, when he gained three seats.  Major political parties changed their response to Janmaat and his views: rather than actively ignoring him they also started openly addressing the issue of immigration.   In the 1998 election the CD lost all three of its seats. Janmaat had become increasingly paranoid and said that computers used for voting had been tampered with.      In 1999, Janmaat was in the process of starting another party, the Conservative Democrats,  however it did not get off the ground and did not participate in the 2002 election. His failing health forced him to withdraw from politics, however the changing political climate did prompt him to challenge his conviction for discrimination at the European Court of Justice. Janmaat's death in 2002 halted the case.
Political viewsJanmaat wanted to represent the indigenous Dutch workers and middle class. His views were based mostly on economic and materialistic arguments rather than an underlying ideology.  Disappointing economic growth, unemployment and government cutbacks could not be addressed while large numbers of immigrants were flowing in to the country.  Janmaat was against a multicultural society: immigrants should either assimilate into Dutch culture, or return to their country of birth. 
His best known slogans were "Holland is not a country of immigration," "full=full" and "we will abolish the multicultural society, as soon as we get the chance and power"; he was convicted for the latter two statements. According to Jan van de Beek, Hans Janmaat often used economic arguments in his tirades against immigrants. He often walked a fine line between freedom of speech and hate speech, and would eventually receive fines and a conditional prison sentence for incitement to hatred and discrimination against foreigners.    Widely considered uncharismatic, he occasionally made rude statements about immigrants and other politicians. He argued that Ernst Hirsch Ballin should not be allowed to hold a high office because of his Jewish heritage     and said he was not saddened by the sudden death of political opponent Ien Dales. 
LegacyOther parties erected a cordon sanitaire around Janmaat, ignoring him while he spoke in parliament.  A taboo on discussing negative aspects of immigration existed in the Dutch political climate in the 1980s. Meindert Fennema, professor of political theory of ethnic relations at the University of Amsterdam, argued in 2006 that Janmaat was convicted for statements that are now commonplace   due to changes in the political climate (caused in part by the September 11 attacks, and the assassinations of Pim Fortuyn and Theo van Gogh). 
References 
External links

  Drs. J.G.H. (Hans) Janmaat  (Parlement & Politiek) 

  DEFAULTSORT












 
 
	Peter the Aleut
 
Cungagnaq (date of birth unknown - d. 1815) is venerated as a martyr and saint (as Peter the Aleut) by some jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church.  He was allegedly a native of Kodiak Island (Aleutian Islands), and is said to have received the Christian name of Peter when he was baptized into the Orthodox faith by the monks of St. Herman's missionaries operating in the north. All Saints of North America, an Orthodox Church in Virginia, USA   He is purported to have been captured by Spanish soldiers near San Pedro (Pacifica, California) and tortured and killed at the instigation of Roman Catholic priests either there or at Mission Dolores,  in San Francisco. Saint Peter the Aleut, Oct 22 1999, University of Michigan   At the time identified for his death, California was Spanish territory, and Spain was worried about Russian advances southwards from Alaska.  Hubert Howe Bancroft, in his multi-volume History of California, only notes that, in connection with an incident wherein a Russian fur-hunting expedition was taken into custody after declining to leave San Pedro; one Russian source accused "the Spaniards of cruelty to the captives, stating that according to Kuskof’s  report one Aleut who refused to become a Catholic died from ill-treatment received from the padre at San Francisco."
MartyrdomAccording to the most fully developed version of the story, in 1815 a group of Russian employees of the Russian American Company and their Aleut seal and otter hunters, including Peter, was captured by Spanish soldiers, while hunting illicitly for seals near San Pedro.  According to the original account, the soldiers took them to Misión San Pedro y Pablo for interrogation. One Russian source states that after being taken prisoner near modern Los Angeles, the captives were taken to Mission Dolores—that is, modern San Francisco.  With threats of torture, the Roman Catholic priests attempted to force the Aleuts to deny their Orthodox faith and to convert to Roman Catholicism. When the Aleuts refused, the priest had a toe severed from each of Peter's feet. Peter still refused to renounce his faith and the Spanish priest ordered a group of Native Americans, indigenous to California, to cut off each finger of Peter's hands, one joint at a time, finally removing both his hands.  They eventually disemboweled him, making him a martyr to the Eastern Orthodox faith.  They were about to torture the next Aleut when orders were received to release them.
HistoricityAn account of the martyrdom of Peter the Aleut is contained in a lengthy letter written on Nov. 22, 1865, by Symeon Ivanovich Yanovsky to Damascene, abbot of the Valaam Monastery in Finland.   Yanovsky (1789–1876), who is also one of the chief sources of information about St. Herman of Alaska, was chief manager of the Russian colonies from 1818-1820. In the letter he was reporting on an incident that he had heard from a supposed eyewitness, and that had taken place in 1815, that is, a half a century earlier.  The letter contains the description of Peter being tortured by "Jesuits": the Jesuit order had been suppressed in 1773, and had only been reconstituted in 1814. needs reference  There were in 1815 no Jesuits within a thousand miles of California.  There were Franciscans in California at the time. Yanovsky adds, "At the time I reported all this to the Head Office in St. Petersburg." And indeed, this earlier communication, his official dispatch to the company's main office—dated Feb. 15, 1820, five years after the event—also relates the story of St. Peter's martyrdom, albeit with different details. 
VenerationAccording to Yanovsky's 1865 letter, upon receiving the report of Peter's death, St. Herman back on Kodiak Island was moved to cry out, "Holy new-martyr Peter, pray to God for us!" Peter the Aleut was glorified as a saint by the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia and locally glorified by the Diocese of Alaska of the Orthodox Church in America as the "Martyr of San Francisco" in 1980.  His feast day is celebrated on September 24.There are a number of churches dedicated to him in North America, for example at Lake Havasu City, Arizona;  Minot, North Dakota;  Calgary;  and Abita Springs, Louisiana. 
Notes 
Sources

Bancroft, Hubert Howe, History of California 1801-1824 vol II (History Company, 1886).
Farris, Glenn, "The Strange Tale of Saint Peter, the Aleut: A Russian Orthodox Martyr on the California Frontier".   Paper presented at "The Spanish Missions and California Indians Symposium," D-Q University, 3 March 1990.
Ogden, Adele, The California Sea Otter Trade 1784-1848 (Berkeley: University of California Publications in History, 26).
The Russian Orthodox Religious Mission in America, 1794–1837, with Materials Concerning the Life and Works of the Monk German, and Ethnographic Notes by the Hieromonk Gedeon. Originally published in St. Petersburg, Russia in 1894. Translated from the Russian by Colin Bearne; ed. by Richard A. Pierce (Kingston, Ont., Canada: Limestone Press, 1978).
Tarakanoff, Vassili Petrovitch, Statement of My Captivity Among the Californians (Los Angeles: Glen Dawson Press, 1953).
Tikhmenev, P.A, A History of the Russian-American Company.  Translated and edited by Richard Pierce and Alton Donnelly (Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press, 1978).


External links

Full text of Yanofsky's account of the martyrdom of Peter (Orthodox Church in America website)

 
DEFAULTSORT



















 
 
 
 
	Richard Whittington
 
 

Richard Whittington (c. 1354–1423) was a medieval merchant and politician, and the real-life inspiration for the pantomime character Dick Whittington. He was four times Lord Mayor of London, a Member of Parliament and a sheriff of London. In his lifetime he financed a number of public projects, such as drainage systems in poor areas of medieval London, and a hospital ward for unmarried mothers. He bequeathed his fortune to form the Charity of Sir Richard Whittington which, nearly 600 years later, continues to assist people in need.  Despite knowing three of the five kings who reigned during his lifetime, there is no evidence that he was knighted.
BiographyHe was born in Gloucestershire, at Pauntley in the Forest of Dean,  although his family originated from Kinver in Staffordshire, England, where his grandfather Sir William de Whittington was a knight at arms.  His date of birth is variously given as in the 1350s and he died in London in 1423. However, he was a younger son and so would not inherit his father's estate as the eldest son might expect to do. Consequently he was sent to the City of London to learn the trade of mercer. He became a successful trader, dealing in valuable imports such as silks and velvets, both luxury fabrics, much of which he sold to the Royal and noble court from about 1388. There is indirect evidence that he was also a major exporter to Europe of much sought after English woollen cloth such as Broadcloth. From 1392 to 1394 he sold goods to Richard II worth £3,500 (equivalent to more than £1.5m today). About Us Measuring Worth Calculator  He also began money-lending in 1388, preferring this to outward shows of wealth such as buying property. By 1397 he was also lending large sums of money to the King.   In 1384 Whittington had become a Councilman. In 1392 he was one of the city's delegation to the King at Nottingham at which the King seized the City of London's lands because of alleged misgovernment. By 1393, he had become an alderman and was appointed Sheriff by the incumbent mayor, William Staundone,  as well as becoming a member of the Mercers' Company. When Adam Bamme, the mayor of London, died in June 1397, Whittington was imposed on the city by the King as Lord Mayor of London two days later to fill the vacancy with immediate effect. Within days Whittington had negotiated with the King a deal in which the city bought back its liberties for £10,000 (nearly £4m today).   He was elected mayor by a grateful populace on 13 October 1397.   The deposition of Richard II in 1399 did not affect Whittington and it is thought that he merely acquiesced in the coup led by Bolingbroke.  Whittington had long supplied the new king, Henry IV, as a prominent member of the landowning elite and so his business simply continued as before. He also lent the new king substantial amounts of money. He was elected mayor again in 1406—during 1407 he was simultaneously Mayor in both London and Calais —and in 1419.  In 1416, he became a Member of Parliament, and was also in turn influential with Henry IV's son, Henry V, also lending him large amounts of money and serving on several Royal Commissions of oyer and terminer. For example, Henry V employed him to supervise the expenditure to complete Westminster Abbey. Despite being a moneylender himself he was sufficiently trusted and respected to sit as a judge in usury trials in 1421.  Whittington also collected revenues and import duties. A long dispute with the Company of Brewers over standard prices and measures of ale was won by Whittington. 
BenefactionsIn his lifetime Whittington donated much of his profit to the city and left further endowments by his Will. He financed: 

the rebuilding of the Guildhall
a ward for unmarried mothers at St Thomas' Hospital
drainage systems for areas around Billingsgate and Cripplegate
the rebuilding of his parish church, St Michael Paternoster Royal
a public toilet in the parish of St Martin Vintry that was cleansed by the River Thames at high tide
most of Greyfriars library

He also provided accommodation for his apprentices in his own house. He passed a law prohibiting the washing of animal skins by apprentices in the River Thames in cold, wet weather because many young boys had died through hypothermia or in the strong river currents.
Death and bequestsWhittington died in March 1423. In 1402 (aged 52) he had married Alice, daughter of Sir Ivo FitzWarin (or Fitzwarren) of Wantage in Berkshire (now Oxfordshire), but she predeceased him in 1411. They had no children. He was buried in the church of St Michael Paternoster Royal, to which he had donated large sums during his lifetime. The tomb is now lost, and the mummified cat found in the church tower in 1949 during a search for its location probably dates to the time of the Wren restoration.  In the absence of heirs, Whittington left £7,000 in his will to charity, in those days a large sum, with a modern-day equivalence of about £3m.  Some of this was used to 

rebuild Newgate Prison and Newgate and accommodation in it for the Sheriffs and Recorder which is the forerunner of that in the Old Bailey
build the first library in Guildhall (the ancestor of the modern Guildhall Library)
repair St Bartholomew's Hospital
the creation of his 'college' i.e. almshouse and hospital originally at St Michael's
install some of the first public drinking fountains
The almshouses were relocated in 1966 to Felbridge near East Grinstead. Sixty elderly women and a few married couples currently live in them. The Whittington Charity also disburses money each year to the needy through the Mercers' Company. The Whittington hospital is now at Archway in the London Borough of Islington and a small statue of a cat along Highgate Hill further commemorates his legendary feline.
Dick Whittington—stage character 

The gifts left in Whittington's will made him well known and he became a character in an English story that was adapted for the stage as a play, The History of Richard Whittington, of his lowe byrth, his great fortune, in February 1604.  In the 19th century this became popular as a pantomime called Dick Whittington and His Cat,   very loosely based on Richard Whittington. There are several versions of the traditional story, which tells how Dick, a boy from a poor Gloucestershire family, sets out for London to make his fortune, accompanied by, or later acquiring, his cat. At first he meets with little success, and is tempted to return home. However, on his way out of the city, whilst climbing Highgate Hill from modern-day Archway, he hears the Bow Bells of London ringing, and believes they are sending him a message.  There is now a large hospital on Highgate Hill, named the Whittington Hospital, after this supposed episode.  A traditional rhyme  associated with this tale is:

Turn again, Whittington,
Once Lord Mayor of London!
Turn again, Whittington,
Twice Lord Mayor of London!
Turn again, Whittington,
Thrice Lord Mayor of London!

On returning to London, Dick embarks on a series of adventures. In one version of the tale, he travels abroad on a ship, and wins many friends as a result of the rat-catching activities of his cat; in another he sends his cat and it is sold to make his fortune. Eventually he does become prosperous, marries his master's daughter Alice Fitzwarren (the name of the real Whittington's wife), and is made Lord Mayor of London three times. The common belief that he served three rather than four times as Lord Mayor stems from the City's records 'Liber  Albus' compiled at his request by the City Clerk John Carpenter wherein his name appears only three times as the remainder term of his deceased predecessor Adam Bamme and his own consequent term immediately afterwards appear as one entry for 1397.As the son of gentry Whittington was never very poor and there is no evidence that he kept a cat. Whittington may have become associated with a thirteenth-century Persian folktale about an orphan who gained a fortune through his cat,  but the tale was common throughout Europe at that time.  Folklorists have suggested that the most popular legends about Whittington—that his fortunes were founded on the sale of his cat, who was sent on a merchant vessel to a rat-beset Eastern emperor—originated in a popular 17th-century engraving  by Renold Elstracke in which his hand rested on a cat, but the picture only reflects a story already in wide circulation.  Elstracke's  oddly-shaped cat was in fact a later replacement by printseller Peter Stent for what had been a skull in the original, with the change being made to conform to the story already in existence, in order to increase sales. 
Notes 
References

The History of Sir Richard Whittington by T. H. (1885), from Project Gutenberg
Dick Whittington and His Cat


External links

Nine part radio play from BBC Radio Gloucestershire
The History of Whittington, as collected by Andrew Lang in The Blue Fairy Book (1889)
Dick Whittington and His Cat.  London: Jarrold, 1900
"Who Was Dick Whittington?" Museum of London 17 December 2006  (Free educational program: Storytelling)Event details
Dick Whittington and His Cat as retold by Rohini Chowdhury

 
DEFAULTSORT
 



















 
 
 
 
 
 
	Bob Dole
 
 Robert Joseph "Bob" Dole (born July 22, 1923) is an American politician who represented Kansas in the United States Senate from 1969 to 1996 and the House of Representatives from 1961 to 1969. In the 1976 presidential election he was the Republican Party nominee for Vice President and incumbent President Gerald Ford's running mate. In the presidential election of 1996 he was the Republican nominee for President against incumbent Bill Clinton. Dole is the only politician to have been his party's nominee for both President and Vice President, but elected to neither office.In 2007, President George W. Bush appointed Dole as a co-chair of the commission to investigate problems at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, along with Donna Shalala, a former member of the Clinton cabinet.    Bob Dole is currently a member of the advisory council of the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation and special counsel at the Washington, D.C. office of law firm Alston & Bird. Dole is married to former U.S. cabinet member and former U.S. Senator Elizabeth Hanford Dole of North Carolina. 
Early yearsDole was born in Russell, Kansas, the son of Bina M. (née Talbott; 1904–1983) and Doran Ray Dole (1901–1975).  His father, who had moved the family to Russell while Dole was still a toddler, made a living by running a small creamery. Among his father's customers was the father of Arlen Specter who ran a junkyard in the town and used Dole's scales to weigh junk. Specter, who was six years younger than Dole and graduated Russell High School in 1947, was not a Dole contemporary although Specter's brother Morton Specter and Dole's brother Kenny Dole were friends.  During the Great Depression, which hit Kansas very hard, the Dole family moved into the basement of their home and rented out the rest of the house. As a boy, he took many odd jobs around Russell, and he would later work as a soda jerk in the local drug store.Dole graduated from Russell High School in the spring of 1941  and enrolled at the University of Kansas the following fall. Dole had been a star high school athlete in Russell, and influential Kansas basketball coach Phog Allen traveled to Russell to recruit him to play for the basketball team. While at KU, Dole played for the basketball team, the track team, and the football team. In football, Dole played at the end position, earning varsity letters in 1942 and 1944. While in college, he joined the Kappa Sigma fraternity, where he later became one of the "Men of the Year". Dole's pre-med studies at KU were interrupted by World War II. After the war, he returned to being a law student. Dole attended the University of Arizona from 1948 to 1951 and earned his degree from Washburn University School of Law in 1952. Dole was initiated as a Freemason of Russell Lodge No. 177, Russell, Kansas on April 19, 1955.  Dole grew up in a house at 1035 North Maple in Russell ( ) and it remained his official residence throughout his political career. 
World War II and recoveryIn 1942, Dole joined the United States Army's Enlisted Reserve Corps to fight in World War II. Dole became a second lieutenant in the Army's 10th Mountain Division.
In April 1945, while engaged in combat near Castel d'Aiano in the Apennine mountains southwest of Bologna, Italy, Dole was hit by German machine gun fire in his upper right back and his right arm was also badly injured. As Lee Sandlin describes, when fellow soldiers saw the extent of his injuries all they thought they could do was to "give him the largest dose of morphine they dared and write an 'M' for 'morphine' on his forehead in his own blood, so that nobody else who found him would give him a second, fatal dose."  Dole had to wait nine hours on the battlefield before being taken to the 15th Evacuation Hospital, where he began a recovery that would take until 1948 at Percy Jones Army Hospital in Battle Creek, Michigan (where Dole met future fellow politicians Daniel Inouye and Philip Hart). His right arm was paralyzed; Dole often carried a pen in his right hand to signal that he could not shake hands with that arm.The hospital where Dole recovered from his wounds, the former Battle Creek Sanitarium, is now named Hart-Dole-Inouye Federal Center in honor of three patients who became United States Senators: Dole, Philip Hart and Daniel Inouye.Dole was decorated three times, receiving two Purple Hearts for his injuries, and the Bronze Star with combat "V" for valor for his attempt to assist a downed radio man.
Political careerDole ran for office for the first time in 1950 and was elected to the Kansas House of Representatives, serving a two-year term.  After graduating from law school at Washburn University in Topeka, he was admitted to the bar and commenced the practice of law in his hometown of Russell in 1952.Also in 1952 Dole became the County Attorney of Russell County, serving in that position for eight years. In 1960, Dole was elected to the United States House of Representatives from Kansas' 6th Congressional District, located in central Kansas. In 1962, his district was merged with the 3rd District in western Kansas to form the 1st Congressional District, a huge 60-county district that soon became known as the "Big First." Dole was re-elected that year and twice thereafter without serious difficulty.
U.S. Senate

In 1968, Dole defeated Kansas Governor William H. Avery for the Republican nomination for the United States Senate to succeed retiring Senator Frank Carlson, subsequently being elected. Dole was re-elected in 1974, 1980, 1986, and 1992, before resigning on June 11, 1996 to focus on his Presidential campaign. Dole only faced one truly enthusiastic and well-financed challenger – in 1974 by Congressman Bill Roy. Much of Roy's popularity was in response to the fallout from Watergate. Dole would win re-election in 1974 by only a few thousand votes, having in the end graphically painted Roy as pro-abortion. While in the Senate, Dole served as chairman of the Republican National Committee from 1971 until 1973, the ranking Republican on the Agriculture Committee from 1975 to 1978, and the ranking Republican on the Finance Committee from 1979 to 1980.When the Republicans took control of the Senate after the 1980 elections, Dole became chairman of the Finance Committee in 1981, serving until 1985. From 1985, when Howard Baker of Tennessee retired, until his resignation from the Senate, Dole was the leader of the Senate Republicans, serving as Majority Leader from 1985 until 1987 and again from 1995 to 1996. Dole served as Minority Leader from 1987 to 1995. Following the advice of conservative William Kristol, Dole flatly rejected the health care plan of Bill Clinton, remarking, "There is no crisis in health care."Dole had a moderate voting record and was widely considered to be one of the few Kansas Republicans who could bridge the gap between the moderate and conservative wings of the Kansas Republican Party. As a Congressman in the early '60s, he supported the major civil rights bills, which appealed to moderates. When Johnson proposed the Great Society in 1964–65, Dole voted against some War on Poverty measures like public-housing subsidies and Medicare, thus appealing to conservatives. Dole's first speech in the Senate in 1969 was a plea for federal aid for the handicapped. Later, as a member of the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs Dole joined liberal Senator George McGovern to lower eligibility requirements for federal food stamps, a liberal goal that was supported by Kansas farmers.Dole's hawkishness on the Vietnam War and on crime issues kept him in good standing with the right wing. When they heard Nixon might make Dole chairman of the Republican National Committee, half the Republican Senators protested, especially moderates who feared Dole would direct party assets to conservatives. They were wrong, as Dole in fact offered something to all Republican factions. 
Presidential politics
In 1976, Dole ran unsuccessfully for Vice President on a ticket headed by President Gerald Ford. Incumbent Vice President Nelson Rockefeller had withdrawn from consideration the previous fall, and Dole was chosen. Dole stated during the Vice Presidential debate with Walter Mondale, "I figured it up the other day: If we added up the killed and wounded in Democrat wars in this century, it would be about 1.6 million Americans — enough to fill the city of Detroit".  The remark backfired.Dole ran for the 1980 Republican Presidential nomination, eventually won by Ronald Reagan. Despite Dole's fame from the '76 campaign, he was viewed as a lower tier candidate, trailing not only Reagan but George Bush, Howard Baker, John Connally, and John Anderson. Dole received only 597 votes (less than 1%) in the New Hampshire primary and immediately withdrew.  In March 1980, Dole urged former President Ford to jump into the race as a stop-Reagan candidate.Dole made a more serious bid in 1988, formally announcing his candidacy in Russell, Kansas, on November 9, 1987. At the ceremony, Dole was presented with the cigar box that had been used to collect donations for his war-related medical expenses. The box contained $100,000 in campaign donations. Dole started out strong by solidly defeating then-Vice President George H.W. Bush in the Iowa caucus—Bush finished third, behind television evangelist Pat Robertson. However, Bush recovered in time to defeat Dole in the New Hampshire primary a week later. The New Hampshire contest between the two was particularly bitter although they differed little on the issues. After the returns had come in on the night of that primary, Dole appeared to lose his temper in a television interview. Dole was interviewed live in New Hampshire on NBC by Tom Brokaw, who was in the NBC studio in New York. It happened that Bush was right next to Brokaw in the studio. Brokaw asked Bush if he had anything to say to Dole. Bush responded, "No, just wish him well and meet again in the south." Dole, apparently not expecting to see Bush, when asked the same question about the Vice President said, "Yeah, stop lying about my record", largely in response to a very tough New Hampshire Bush commercial which accused Dole of "straddling" on taxes. This remark prompted some members of the media to perceive him as angry about the loss, contributing to his "hatchet man" image earned during his tenure as RNC chairman and the '76 campaign.Despite two big wins in South Dakota and Minnesota a week after New Hampshire, Dole was not able to recover. Viewed by many as a micromanager who could not effectively oversee a presidential campaign while serving as a senator , he did not hire a full-time campaign manager, former TN Senator Bill Brock, until the fall of 1987, well after Bush's team had been in place. Despite raising almost as much money as the Bush campaign, the Dole campaign spent its money faster and was vastly outspent in the contests held after IA, NH, MN, and SD. Despite a key endorsement by Senator Strom Thurmond, one of many Republican senators who supported their leader, Dole was defeated by Bush again in South Carolina in early March. Several days later, every southern state voted for Bush in a "Super Tuesday" sweep. Another big victory in Illinois persuaded Dole to withdraw from the race.
1996 presidential campaign
 
Dole was the early front runner for the GOP nomination in the 1996 presidential race. He was expected to win the nomination against underdog candidates such as the more conservative Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and more moderate Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania. However populist Pat Buchanan upset Dole in the early New Hampshire primary, with Dole finishing second and former Tennessee governor Lamar Alexander finishing third. Publisher Steve Forbes also ran and broadcast a stream of negative ads. At least eight candidates ran for the nomination.Dole eventually won the nomination, becoming the oldest first-time presidential nominee at the age of 73 years, 1-month (Ronald Reagan was 73 years, 6 months in 1984, for his second presidential nomination). In his acceptance speech, he stated "Let me be the bridge to an America that only the unknowing call myth. Let me be the bridge to a time of tranquillity, faith, and confidence in action",  to which incumbent president and Democratic nominee Bill Clinton responded, "We do not need to build a bridge to the past, we need to build a bridge to the future.".  Dole however had been forced to spend more on the primary than he had planned and until the convention in San Diego faced federal limits on campaign spending. Dole hoped to use his long experience in Senate procedures to maximize publicity from his rare positioning as Senate Majority Leader against an incumbent President but was stymied by Senate Democrats. On June 11, 1996, Dole resigned his seat to focus on the campaign, saying he was either heading for "The White House or home". The incumbent, Bill Clinton, had no serious primary opposition. Dole promised a 15% across-the-board reduction in income tax rates and made former Congressman and supply side advocate Jack Kemp his running mate. Dole also found himself criticized from both the left and the right within the Republican Party over the convention platform, one of the major issues being the inclusion of the Human Life Amendment. Bill Clinton framed the narrative against Dole early, painting him as a mere clone of unpopular then-House Speaker Newt Gingrich, warning America that Dole would work in concert with the Republican Congress to slash popular social programs, like Medicare and Social Security, dubbed by Clinton as "Dole-Gingrich".  Dole's tax-cut plan found itself under attack from the White House, who said it would "blow a hole in the deficit" which had been cut nearly in half during his opponent's term.  Dole was defeated, as pundits had long expected, by Bill Clinton in the 1996 election. Clinton won in a 379–159 Electoral College landslide, capturing 49.2% of the vote against Dole's 40.7% and Ross Perot's 8.4% who drew equally from both candidates. Dole is the only person in the history of the two major U.S. political parties to have been his party's nominee for both President and Vice President, but who was never elected to either office.The span of 20 years between his participation in the 1976 vice-presidential debate and the 1996 presidential debates, is the longest for any candidate since televised debates in presidential election years were instituted in 1960.
Retirement
Dole has worked part-time for a Washington, D.C. law firm, and engaged in a career of writing, consulting, public speaking, and television appearances. This has included becoming a television commercial spokesman for such products as Viagra, Visa, Dunkin' Donuts and Pepsi-Cola (with Britney Spears), and as an occasional political commentator on the popular American interview program Larry King Live and has guested a number of times on Comedy Central's satirical news program, The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. Dole was, for a short time, a commentator opposite Bill Clinton on CBS's 60 Minutes. Dole guest-starred as himself on NBC's Brooke Shields sitcom Suddenly Susan in January 1997 (shortly after losing the presidential election). On the Larry King show Dole had a heated exchange with Democratic presidential primary candidate Wesley Clark in which Dole correctly predicted that Clark would lose the New Hampshire primary and other primaries. In 2001, Dole, at age 77, was treated successfully for an abdominal aortic aneurysm by vascular surgeon Kenneth Ouriel. Dr. Ouriel said Dole "maintained his sense of humor throughout his care."   The Robert J. Dole Institute of Politics, housed on the University of Kansas campus in Lawrence, Kansas, was established to bring bipartisanship back to politics. The Institute, which opened in July 2003 to coincide with Dole's 80th birthday, has featured such notables as former President Bill Clinton and former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani.Dole has written several books, including one on jokes told by the Presidents of the United States, in which he ranks the presidents according to their level of humor. On January 18, 1989, Dole was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Reagan. Then, on January 17, 1997, President Clinton awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his service in the military and his political career. Dole received the American Patriot Award in 2004 for his lifelong dedication to America and his service in World War II.Dole's legacy also includes a commitment to combating hunger both in the United States and around the globe. In addition to numerous domestic programs, along with former Senator George McGovern (D-South Dakota), Dole created an international school lunch program through the George McGovern-Robert Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program, which helps fight child hunger and poverty by providing nutritious meals to children in schools in developing countries. This program has since led to greatly increased global interest in and support for school-feeding programs — which benefit girls and young women, in particular — and won McGovern and Dole the 2008 World Food Prize.In recent years, Dole has struggled with health problems. In December 2004, he had a hip-replacement operation, which required him to receive blood thinners. One month after the surgery it was determined that Dole was bleeding inside his head. He spent 40 days at Walter Reed, and upon release his "good" arm, the left, was of limited use. Dole told a reporter that he needed help to handle the simplest of tasks, since both of his arms are injured. Dole undergoes physical therapy for his left shoulder once a week, but doctors have told him that he might not regain total use of his left arm. In 2009, he was hospitalized for an elevated heart rate and sores on his leg for which he underwent a successful skin graft procedure. In February 2010, he was hospitalized for pneumonia after undergoing knee surgery. He spent 10 months at Walter Reed, recovering from the surgery and experienced 3 bouts with pneumonia. Dole was released from the hospital in November 2010. However, in January 2011, Dole was readmitted to Walter Reed Hospital and spent about six days there, being treated for a fever as well as a minor infection.Dole is special counsel at the Washington, D.C., law firm of Alston & Bird. On April 12, 2005, Dole released his autobiography One Soldier's Story: A Memoir (ISBN 0-06-076341-8), which talks of his World War II experiences and his battle to survive his war injuries. Dole also was responsible for a large amount of funds raised for the U.S. National World War II memorial in Washington, D.C.On June 28, 2004, Dole was named 'Shining Star of Perseverance' by the Assurant Employee Benefits WillReturn Council. On September 18, 2004, Dole offered the inaugural lecture to dedicate the University of Arkansas Clinton School of Public Service at which Dole chronicled his life as a public servant as well as discussed the importance of public service in terms of defense, civil rights, the economy, and in daily life. In 2007, Dole joined fellow former Senate Majority Leaders Howard Baker, Tom Daschle, and George Mitchell to found the Bipartisan Policy Center, a non-profit think tank that works to develop policies suitable for bipartisan support. That same year, President George W. Bush appointed Dole and Donna Shalala co-chairs of a commission to investigate problems at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Dole appears in the 2008 documentary on Lee Atwater, Boogie Man: The Lee Atwater Story. In the film, Dole says, "I don't comment on Atwater." Additionally, "This isn't politics, this is garbage."On January 26, 2012, Dole issued a letter critical of Newt Gingrich, focusing on Dole's and Gingrich's time working together on Capitol Hill.   The letter was issued immediately before the Florida primary.  Bob Dole endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination. 
Personal life
Dole married Phyllis Holden, an occupational therapist at a veterans hospital, in Battle Creek, Michigan in 1948. Their daughter, Robin, was born in 1954. Dole and Holden divorced in 1972. Holden died on April 22, 2008.In 1975 Dole was elevated to the 33rd˚of the Fraternal Order of Freemasonry to which he is a member.  In that same year he married former Senator Elizabeth Dole, née Hanford, of North Carolina. Mrs. Dole ran unsuccessfully for the Republican Presidential nomination in 2000 and was elected to the United States Senate in 2002, to succeed the retiring Republican Jesse Helms. However, she lost her seat in 2008, a heavily Democratic year, to Kay Hagan.
Electoral history 
See also

Kemp Commission
Notable Freemasons
 
Notes 
References

 
Dole, Bob: One Soldier's Story: A Memoir. (2005). HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-076341-8.
James W. Ceaser and Andrew E. Busch: Losing to Win: The 1996 Elections and American Politics. (1997). Rowman & Littlefield.
Clinton, Bill: My Life. (2005). ISBN 1-4000-3003-X.
Robert E. Denton Jr.: The 1996 Presidential Campaign: A Communication Perspective. (1998). Praeger Publishers.
Elovitz, Paul: "Work, Laughter and Tears: Bob Dole's Childhood, War Injury, the Conservative Republicans and the 1996 Election". Journal of Psychohistory (1996) 24(2): 147–162.  .
Joshua Wolf Shenk: "The Best and Worst of Bob Dole", Washington Monthly, Vol. 28, July 1996 online
Kerry Tymchuk, Molly Meijer Wertheimer, Nichola D. Gutgold: Elizabeth Hanford Dole: Speaking from the Heart. (2004). Praeger.
Bob Dole discussing Lee Atwater in the film [[Boogie Man: The Lee Atwater Story]]


External links 
 
 

DOLE, Robert Joseph, (1923 – )
His official website
His remarks at the dedication of the Dole Institute of Politics at the University of Kansas
His memorial to Ronald Reagan after Reagan's death (registration required)
The Robert J. Dole Institute of Politics
His biography on Alston & Bird's website
CNN AllPolitics review of his early life
Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony for the Presidential Citizens Medal – January 18, 1989
 
Booknotes interview with Dole on Historical Almanac of the United States Senate, September 9, 1990.
C-Span interviews with Bob Dole

 
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
 
|-
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
|-
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DEFAULTSORT





































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Primož Trubar
 

Primož Trubar or Primož Truber ( ) (1508 – 28 June 1586)    was the Protestant reformer, most known as the author of the first Slovene language printed book,    the founder and the first superintendent of the Protestant Church of the Slovene Lands, notable for consolidating the Slovene language. Trubar is the key figure of Slovenian cultural history and in many aspects a major historical personality.,    
His life and workTrubar was born in the village Rašica    (now in the Velike Lašče municipality) in the Duchy of Carniola, then under the Habsburgs. In the years 1520–1521 he attended school in Rijeka,  in 1522–1524 he continued his education in Salzburg. From there he went to Trieste under the tutorship of the Roman Catholic bishop Pietro Bonomo, where he got in touch with the Humanist writers, in particular Erasmus of Rotterdam. In 1528 he enrolled at the University of Vienna, but did not complete his studies. In 1530 he returned to the Slovene Lands and became a preacher. He gradually leaned towards Protestantism and was in 1547 expelled from Ljubljana.While a Protestant preacher in Rothenburg, Germany, he wrote first two books in Slovene, Catechismus and Abecedarium, which were published in 1550 in Tübingen, Germany.  In the following years, he authored around 25 more books in Slovenian; the most important of them is the translation of the complete New Testament, which he started while living in Kempten im Allgäu. Trubar died on 28 June 1586 in Derendingen, Germany (now part of the city of Tübingen), where he is also buried.
Commemoration


In 1986, the Slovenian television produced a TV series, directed by Andrej Strojan with the screen play written by Drago Jančar, in which Trubar was played by the Slovenian actor Polde Bibič.Trubar was commemorated on the 10 tolar banknote  in 1992, and on the Slovenian 1 euro coin in 2007. In 2008, the Government of Slovenia proclaimed the Year of Primož Trubar and the 500th anniversary of Trubar's birth was celebrated throughout the country.  A commemorative €2 coin and a postage stamp were issued.    An exhibition dedicated to the life and work of Primož Trubar, and the achievements of the Slovenian Reformation Movement was on display at the National Museum of Slovenia from 6 March to 31 December 2008.In 2009, the Trubar Forum Association printed Trubar's Catechism and Abecedarium in modern Slovene, in a scholarly edition that includes both the Trubar-era Slovene and the modern Slovene translation with scholarly notes. 
The "Sermon on Faith", a portion of the Catechism, is available in modern Slovene, English, German and Esperanto. Since 2010, 8 June is commemorated in Slovenia as the Primož Trubar Day.   
See also

Adam Bohorič
Sebastian Krelj
Jurij Dalmatin
István Küzmics


Notes 
References  
DEFAULTSORT













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Peter Gabriel
 
 Peter Brian Gabriel (born 13 February 1950) is an English singer, musician, and songwriter who rose to fame as the lead vocalist and flautist of the progressive rock group Genesis.  After leaving Genesis, Gabriel went on to a successful solo career. His 1986 album, So, is his most commercially successful, and the album's biggest hit, "Sledgehammer", won a record nine MTV Awards at the 1987 MTV Video Music Awards, and the song is the most played music video in the history of the station. More recently, Gabriel has focused on producing and promoting world music and pioneering digital distribution methods for music. He has also been involved in various humanitarian efforts. Gabriel has won numerous music awards throughout his career, including three Brit Awards—winning Best British Male in 1987, six Grammy Awards, thirteen MTV Video Music Awards, and in 2007 he was honoured as a BMI Icon at the 57th annual BMI London Awards for his “influence on generations of music makers.”    Gabriel was also awarded the Polar Music Prize in 2009, and was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Genesis in 2010.
Early lifePeter Gabriel was born in Chobham, Surrey, England.  His father, Ralph Parton Gabriel, was an electrical engineer, and his mother, Edith Irene Allen,  from a musical family, taught him to play the piano at an early age. He attended Cable House, a private primary (pre-prep) school in Woking, Surrey, St. Andrews Prep School in Horsell, then Charterhouse School (Godalming) from 1963. He played drums in his first rock bands, and Mike Rutherford commented in 1985 that "Pete was - and still is, I think - a frustrated drummer." Neer, Dan (1985). Mike on Mike [interview LP], Atlantic Recording Corporation. 
Genesis 
Gabriel founded Genesis in 1967 with fellow Charterhouse School pupils Tony Banks, Anthony Phillips, Mike Rutherford, and drummer Chris Stewart. The name of the band was suggested by fellow Charterhouse  alumnus, the pop music impresario Jonathan King, who produced their first album, From Genesis to Revelation.Gabriel was influenced by many different sources in his way of singing, such as Family lead singer Roger Chapman. In 1970, he played the flute on Cat Stevens' album, Mona Bone Jakon.Genesis drew some attention in England and eventually also in Italy, Belgium, Germany and other European countries, largely due to Gabriel's flamboyant stage presence, which involved numerous bizarre costume changes and comical, dreamlike stories told as the introduction to each song (originally Gabriel developed these stories solely to cover the time between songs that the rest of the band would take tuning their instruments and fixing technical glitches). The concerts made extensive use of black light with the normal stage lighting subdued or off. A backdrop of fluorescent white sheets and a comparatively sparse stage made the band into a set of silhouettes, with Gabriel's fluorescent costume and make-up providing the only other sources of light.
CostumesEarly Genesis concerts were hampered by a bad PA system which made it difficult for audiences to understand what Gabriel was singing. According to Mike Rutherford, this drove Gabriel to find other ways to impress his personality on the audience, leading to his performing in various costumes. In an episode of the 2007 British documentary series Seven Ages of Rock, Steve Hackett recalled the first appearance of Gabriel 'in costume'. It was the dress-wearing, fox-headed entity immortalised on the cover of Foxtrot. Hackett and the rest of the band had no inkling that Gabriel was going to do this, and at the time Hackett worried that it would ruin the performance. However, it was a success, encouraging Gabriel to continue wearing costumes while singing.Among Gabriel's many famous costumes, which he developed to visualise the musical ideas of the band as well as to gain press coverage, were "Batwings" for the band's usual opening number, "Watcher of the Skies". Other costumes included "The Flower" and "Magog", which were both alternately worn for "Supper's Ready" from the album Foxtrot. "Britannia" was worn for "Dancing with the Moonlit Knight", and "The Reverend" was worn for "The Battle of Epping Forest" from Selling England by the Pound. "The Old Man" was worn for "The Musical Box" from Nursery Cryme."The Slipperman" and "Rael" were worn during "The Colony of Slippermen", in which "Rael" was the protagonist of the album The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway.
DepartureGabriel's departure from Genesis in 1975—which stunned fans of the group and left many commentators wondering if the band could survive—was the result of a number of factors. His stature as the lead singer of the band, and the added attention garnered by his flamboyant stage persona, led to tensions within the band. Genesis had always operated more or less as a collective, and Gabriel's burgeoning public profile led to fears within the group that he was being unfairly singled out as the creative hub. The band had also begun to feel confined by the reputation (and fans' expectations) attached to their famously elaborate theatrical performances, believing that the visual element of their performances was receiving more attention than their actual music.Tensions were heightened by the ambitious album and tour of the concept work The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, a Gabriel-created concept piece which saw him taking on the lion's share of the lyric writing. During the writing and recording of The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, Gabriel was approached by director William Friedkin, allegedly because Friedkin had found Gabriel's short story in the liner notes to Genesis Live interesting. Gabriel left Genesis to pursue a film project with Friedkin, only to rejoin a week later.  The decision to quit the band was made before the tour supporting The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, with Gabriel explaining his decision to the band while keeping it from the press until the conclusion of that tour. Bassist Mike Rutherford recalled that they all "could see it coming."  Although tensions were high, both Gabriel and the remaining members of Genesis have stated publicly that Gabriel left the band on good terms.The breaking point came with the difficult pregnancy of Gabriel's wife, Jill, and the subsequent birth of their first child, Anna-Marie. When he opted to stay with his sick daughter and wife, rather than record and tour, the resentment from the rest of the band led Gabriel to conclude that he had to leave the group. "Solsbury Hill", Gabriel's debut single as a solo artist, was written specifically about his departure from Genesis. The song also charted on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1978,  reaching the Top 70, though it was recorded in 1976, and appeared on the 'Car' album in 1977. In 1982, Gabriel reunited with his former Genesis colleagues for the one-off concert Six of the Best, in order to recoup debts that arose from his involvement in the staging of the first WOMAD concert.
Solo careerGabriel refused to title any of his first four solo albums, which were all labelled Peter Gabriel using the same typeface, but which featured different cover designs (by Hipgnosis); in all of these designs, Gabriel's face is wholly or partially obscured in some way. The albums are usually differentiated by number in order of release (I, II, III, IV), or by sleeve design, with the first three solo albums often referred to as Car, Scratch and Melt respectively, in reference to their cover artwork. His fourth solo album, also called Peter Gabriel, was titled Security in the U.S. at the behest of Geffen Records.After acquiescing to distinctive titles, Gabriel used a series of 2-letter words to title his next three albums: So, Us, and Up. His most recent greatest hits compilation is titled Hit; within the two-CD package, disc one is labelled "Hit" and disc two is labelled "Miss".
Peter Gabriel albums (1977–1985)Gabriel recorded his first self-titled solo album in 1976 and 1977 with producer Bob Ezrin. His first solo success came with the single "Solsbury Hill", an autobiographical piece expressing his thoughts on leaving Genesis. Although mainly happy with the music, Gabriel felt that the album, and especially the track "Here Comes the Flood" was over-produced. Sparser versions can be heard on Robert Fripp's Exposure, and on Gabriel's greatest hits compilation Shaking the Tree (1990).Gabriel worked with guitarist Fripp as producer of his second solo LP, in 1978. This album was leaner, darker and more experimental, and yielded decent reviews, but no major hits.Gabriel developed a new interest in world music (especially percussion), and for bold production, which made extensive use of recording tricks and sound effects. Gabriel's interest in music technology is considered by many people to be the spark of his success as it inspired his third album. The third album is often credited as the first LP to use the now-famous "gated drum" sound.  Phil Collins played drums on several tracks, including the opener, "Intruder", which featured the reverse-gated, cymbal-less drum kit sound which Collins would also use on his single "In the Air Tonight" and through the rest of the 1980s. Gabriel had requested that his drummers use no cymbals in the album's sessions, and when he heard the result he asked Collins to play a simple pattern for several minutes, then built "Intruder" around it. The album achieved some chart success with the songs "Games Without Frontiers" (#4 U.K, #48 U.S.), and "Biko".Arduous and occasionally damp recording sessions at his rural English estate in 1981 and 1982 resulted in Gabriel's fourth LP release, on which Gabriel took more production responsibility. It was one of the first commercial albums recorded entirely to digital tape (using a Sony mobile truck), and featured the early, extremely expensive, Fairlight CMI sampling computer, which had already made its first brief appearances on the previous album. Gabriel combined a variety of sampled and deconstructed sounds with world-beat percussion and other unusual instrumentation to create a radically new, emotionally charged soundscape. Furthermore, the sleeve art consisted of inscrutable, video-based imagery. Despite the album's peculiar sound, odd appearance, and often disturbing themes, it sold very well.  This album featured his first Top 40 hit in the U.S., "Shock the Monkey", as well as the song "I Have the Touch". The music video for "Shock the Monkey", which featured Gabriel in white face paint and a caged macaque, held the #1 spot on "MTV" for 9 weeks. Geffen records forced Peter to give his fourth self-titled album a name in the US - Security - to mark his arrival on the label and to differentiate his fourth album from the other three.Alternate versions of Gabriel's third and fourth albums were also released with German lyrics. Peter Gabriel 3 consisted of basically the same recording overdubbed with new vocals, while Security was also remixed and several tracks were extended or altered in slight ways.Gabriel toured extensively for each of his albums. Initially, he pointedly eschewed the theatrics that had defined his tenure with Genesis. For his second solo tour, his entire band shaved their heads. By the time of Security he began involving elaborate stage props and acrobatics which had him suspended from gantries, distorting his face with Fresnel lenses and mirrors, and wearing unusual make-up. Recordings of the 1982 tour supporting his ´Security´ album were released as the double LP Plays Live. Some of the dates of his 1983 summer tour of USA and Canada included a section opening for David Bowie. The stage was set for Gabriel's critical and commercial breakout with his next studio release, which was in production for almost three years. During the recording and production of the album he also found time to develop the film soundtrack for Alan Parker's 1984 feature Birdy, which consisted of new material as well as remixed instrumental tracks from his previous studio album.
So, Passion and Us (1986–1994) 
Gabriel achieved his greatest popularity with songs from the 1986 album So.  The album charted at number 1 in the UK Album Chart, and number 2 on the Billboard 200 in the US.   It is certified triple platinum in the UK, and five times platinum in the US.   The album produced three UK Top 20 hits, "Sledgehammer", "Big Time", and "Don't Give Up" — a duet with Kate Bush. Roberts, David (2006). British Hit Singles & Albums. London: Guinness World Records Limited  The album also produced three Top 40 hits in the U.S., "Sledgehammer", "In Your Eyes" (featured in the John Cusack film Say Anything), and "Big Time".  "Sledgehammer", peaked at #1 in the U.S., knocking Genesis' "Invisible Touch" off the top spot, and #4 in the UK. Whitburn, Joel (2006). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Hits. Billboard Books  The ballad "Don't Give Up" was about the devastation of unemployment. Gabriel co-produced So with Daniel Lanois, also known for his work with U2 and Brian Eno.  In 1990, Rolling Stone ranked So number #14 on its list of "Top 100 Albums of the Eighties". The 100 Greatest Albums Of The 80s. 
Rolling Stone. Special Issue 1990. Retrieved 21 November 2011 Gabriel's song "Sledgehammer", which dealt specifically with the themes of sex and sexual relations, was accompanied by a much-lauded music video, which was a collaboration with director Stephen R. Johnson, Aardman Animations, and the Brothers Quay.  The video set a new standard for art in the music video industry, and won nine MTV Video Music Awards in 1987, a record which still stands as of 2011. Peter Gabriel, 'Sledgehammer' (1986) - The 30 All-TIME Best Music Videos Time. Retrieved 19 November 2011  "Sledgehammer" is the most played music video in the history of MTV, and in 1998 it was named the station's number one animated video of all time.   A follow-up video for the song "Big Time" also broke new ground in music video animation and special effects. The song is a story of "what happens to you when you become a little too successful", in Gabriel's words. The success of the album earned Peter Gabriel two awards at the Brit Awards in 1987: Best British Male Solo Artist and Best British Video for "Sledgehammer". The BRITs 1987 Brits.co.uk. Retrieved 24 November 2011  Gabriel was also nominated for three Grammy Awards: Best Male Rock Vocal Performance, Song of the Year, and Record of the Year.    In 1989, Gabriel released Passion, the soundtrack for Martin Scorsese's movie The Last Temptation of Christ. For this work he received his first Grammy Award, in the category of Best New Age Performance. He also received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Original Score - Motion Picture.Following this, Gabriel released Us in 1992 (also co-produced with Daniel Lanois), an album in which he explored the pain of recent personal problems; his failed first marriage, and the growing distance between him and his first daughter. Gabriel's introspection within the context of the album Us can be seen in the first single release "Digging in the Dirt" directed by John Downer. Accompanied by a disturbing video featuring Gabriel covered in snails and various foliage, this song made reference to the psychotherapy which had taken up much of Gabriel's time since the previous album. Gabriel describes his struggle to get through to his daughter in "Come Talk To Me" directed by Matt Mahurin, which featured backing vocals by Sinéad O'Connor. O'Connor also lent vocals to "Blood of Eden", directed by Nichola Bruce and Michael Coulson, the third single to be released from the album, and once again dealing with relationship struggles, this time going right back to Adam's rib for inspiration. The result was one of Gabriel's most personal albums. It met with less success than So, reaching #2 in the album chart on both sides of the Atlantic, and making modest chart impact with the singles "Digging in the Dirt" and the funkier "Steam", which evoked memories of "Sledgehammer". Gabriel followed the release of the album with a world tour (with Paula Cole or Joy Askew filling O'Connor's vocal role) and accompanying double CD and DVD Secret World Live in 1994.Gabriel employed an innovative approach in the marketing of the Us album. Not wishing to feature only images of himself, he asked artist filmmakers Nichola Bruce and Michael Coulson to coordinate a marketing campaign using contemporary artists. Artists such as Helen Chadwick, Rebecca Horn, Nils Udo, Andy Goldsworthy, David Mach and Yayoi Kusama collaborated to create original artworks for each of the 11 songs on the multi-million-selling CD. Coulson and Bruce documented the process on Hi-8 video. Bruce left Real World and Coulson continued with the campaign, using the documentary background material as the basis for a promotional EPK, the long-form video All About Us and the interactive CD-ROM Xplora1.Gabriel won three more Grammy Awards, all in the Music Video category. He won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video in 1993 and 1994 for the videos to "Digging in the Dirt" and "Steam" respectively. Gabriel also won the 1996 Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for his Secret World Live video.
OVO, Up, Scratch My Back and New Blood (1995–present)After five years of not releasing any new music, Gabriel re-emerged with OVO, a soundtrack for the live Millennium Dome Show in London in 2000, and Long Walk Home, the music from the Australian movie Rabbit-Proof Fence, early in 2002. This soundtrack also received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Original Score – Motion Picture. In September 2002, Gabriel released Up, his first full-length studio album in a decade. Entirely self-produced, Up returned to some of the themes of his work in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Three singles failed to make an impression on the charts—in part because almost every track exceeded six minutes in length, with multiple sections—but the album sold well globally, as Gabriel continued to draw from a loyal fan base from his almost forty years in the music business. Up was followed by a world tour featuring his daughter Melanie Gabriel on backing vocals, and two concert DVDs, Growing Up Live (2003) and Still Growing Up: Live & Unwrapped (2004).In 2008, Gabriel contributed to the WALL-E soundtrack several new songs with Thomas Newman, including the film's closing song, "Down to Earth", for which they received the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media.  The song was also nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Original Song - Motion Picture and the Academy Award for Best Original Song.In 2010, Gabriel released Scratch My Back. The album is made up entirely of cover songs including material written by David Bowie, Lou Reed, Arcade Fire, Radiohead, Regina Spektor, Neil Young, and more. The concept for the record is that Gabriel covers songs by various artists and those artists in turn will cover Gabriel songs to be released on a future follow-up album called I'll Scratch Yours. Scratch My Back features only orchestral instrumentation; there are no guitars, drums, or electronic elements that are usual attributes of Gabriel records. A very brief tour followed the album's release where Gabriel performed with a full orchestra and two female backup singers, his daughter Melanie Gabriel and Norwegian singer-songwriter Ane Brun.On 11 October 2011, Gabriel released New Blood, a collection of his earlier songs recorded with an orchestra. A special edition of the album features solely instrumental versions of some of the songs.In Autumn 2012, Gabriel will embark on the Back to Front Tour in which he will perform the entire So album to celebrate its 25th anniversary.  Following this tour, Gabriel has revealed that he is going to take a year's sabbatical from the music industry in order to spend time with his family.  
Musicians and collaboratorsGabriel has worked with a relatively stable crew of musicians and recording engineers throughout his solo career. Bass and Stick player Tony Levin, for example, has appeared on every Gabriel studio album (except Scratch My Back and the soundtracks Passion and Long Walk Home) and has performed on every Gabriel solo tour (except The New Blood Tour).  Guitar player David Rhodes has been Gabriel’s guitarist of choice since 1979.  Prior to So, Jerry Marotta was Gabriel's preferred drummer, both in the studio and on the road. (For the So and Us albums and tours Marotta was replaced by Manu Katché, who was then replaced by Ged Lynch on parts of the Up album and all of the subsequent tour). Gabriel is known for choosing top-flight collaborators, from co-producers such as Ezrin, Fripp, Lillywhite, and Lanois to musicians such as Natalie Merchant, Elizabeth Fraser, L. Shankar, Trent Reznor, Youssou N'Dour, Larry Fast, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Sinéad O'Connor, Kate Bush, Ane Brun, Paula Cole, John Giblin, Peter Hammill, Papa Wemba, Manu Katché, Bayete, Phil Collins (as drummer), and Stewart Copeland.Over the years, Gabriel has collaborated with singer Kate Bush several times; Bush provided backing vocals for Gabriel's "Games Without Frontiers" and "No Self Control" in 1980, and female lead vocal for "Don't Give Up" (a Top 10 hit in the UK) in 1986, and Gabriel appeared on her television special. Their duet of Roy Harper's "Another Day" was discussed for release as a single, but never appeared. He also collaborated with Laurie Anderson on two versions of her composition "Excellent Birds" – one for her 1984 album Mister Heartbreak, and a slightly different version called "This is the Picture (Excellent Birds)", which appeared on cassette and CD versions of So. In 1987, when presenting Gabriel with an award for his music videos, Anderson related an occasion in which a recording session had gone late into the night and Gabriel's voice had begun to sound somewhat strange, almost dreamlike. It was discovered that he had fallen asleep in front of the microphone, but had continued to sing. Gabriel sang (along with Jim Kerr of Simple Minds) on "Everywhere I Go", from The Call's 1986 release, Reconciled. On Toni Childs' 1994 CD, The Woman's Boat, Gabriel sang on the track, "I Met a Man".In 1998, Gabriel appeared on the soundtrack of Babe: Pig in the City, not as a composer, but as the singer of the song "That'll Do", written by Randy Newman. The song was nominated for an Academy Award, and Gabriel and Newman performed it at the following year's Oscar telecast. He performed a similar soundtrack appearance for the 2004 film Shall We Dance?, singing a cover version of "The Book of Love" by The Magnetic Fields.Gabriel has also appeared on Robbie Robertson's self-titled album, singing on "Fallen Angel"; co-written two Tom Robinson singles; and appeared on Joni Mitchell's 1988 album Chalk Mark in a Rainstorm, on the track "My Secret Place".In 2001, Gabriel contributed lead vocals to the song "When You're Falling" on Afro Celt Sound System's Volume 3: Further in Time.  In the summer of 2003, Gabriel performed in Ohio with a guest performance by Uzbek singer Sevara Nazarkhan.Gabriel collaborated on tracks with electronic musician BT. The tracks were never released, as the computers they were contained on were stolen from BT's home in California. He also sang the lyrics for Deep Forest on their theme song for the movie Strange Days. In addition, Gabriel has appeared on Angelique Kidjo's 2007 album Djin Djin, singing on the song "Salala".Gabriel has recorded a cover of the Vampire Weekend single "Cape Cod Kwassa Kwassa" with Hot Chip, where his name is mentioned several times in the chorus. He substitutes the original line "But this feels so unnatural / Peter Gabriel too / This feels so unnatural/ Peter Gabriel too" with "It feels so unnatural / Peter Gabriel too / and it feels so unnatural / to sing your own name."
WOMAD and other projectsGabriel has been interested in world music for many years, with the first musical evidence appearing on his third album. This influence has increased over time, and he is the driving force behind the World of Music, Arts and Dance (WOMAD) movement. He created the Real World Studios and record label to facilitate the creation and distribution of such music by various artists, and he has worked to educate Western culture about the work of such musicians as Yungchen Lhamo, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and Youssou N'dour. He has a long-standing interest in human rights, and launched Witness,  a nonprofit which trains human rights activists to use video and online technologies to expose human rights abuses. In 2006 his work with WITNESS and his long standing support of peace and human rights causes was recognised by the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates with the Man of Peace award. In the 1990s, with Steve Nelson of Brilliant Media and director Michael Coulson, he developed advanced multimedia CD-ROM-based entertainment projects, creating the acclaimed Xplora (the world's largest selling music CD-ROM), and subsequently the EVE CD-ROM. EVE was a music and art adventure game directed by Michael Coulson and co-produced by the Starwave Corporation in Seattle; it won the prestigious Milia d'Or award Grand Prize at the Cannes in 1996 and featured themes and interactivity well in advance of its time. Xplora and EVE can no longer be played on modern PCs, due to changes to their operating systems.In 1994, Gabriel starred in the Breck Eisner short film "Recon" as a detective who enters the minds of murder victims to find their killer's identity.Gabriel helped pioneer a new realm of musical interaction in 2001, visiting Georgia State University's Language Research Center to participate in keyboard jam sessions with bonobo apes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. (This experience inspired the song "Animal Nation," which was performed on Gabriel's 2002 "Growing Up" tour and was featured on the Growing Up Live DVD and The Wild Thornberrys Movie soundtrack.) Gabriel's desire to bring attention to the intelligence of primates also took the form of ApeNet, a project that aimed to link great apes through the internet, enabling the first interspecies internet communication. He was one of the founders of On Demand Distribution (OD2), one of the first online music download services.  Its technology is used by MSN Music UK and others, and has become the dominant music download technology platform for stores in Europe.  OD2 was bought by US company Loudeye in June 2004 and subsequently by Finnish mobile giant Nokia in October 2006 for $60 million.Additionally, Gabriel is also co-founder (with Brian Eno) of a musicians union called Mudda, short for "magnificent union of digitally downloading artists."In 2000, Peter Gabriel collaborated with Zucchero, Anggun and others in a charity for kids with AIDS. Erick Benzi wrote words and music and Patrick Bruel, Stephan Eicher, Faudel, Lokua Kanza, Laam, Nourith, Axelle Red have accepted to sing it.In 2003, Gabriel's song "Burn You Up, Burn You Down" was featured in Cyan Worlds' video game Uru: Ages Beyond Myst. In 2004, Gabriel contributed another song ("Curtains") and contributed voice work on another game in the Myst franchise, Myst IV: Revelation.During the latter part of 2004, Gabriel spent time in a village in eastern Nepal with musician Ram Sharan Nepali, learning esoteric vocal techniques.  Gabriel subsequently invited Nepali to attend and perform at the Womad festival in Adelaide, Australia.  In June 2005, Gabriel and broadcast industry entrepreneur David Engelke purchased Solid State Logic, a leading manufacturer of mixing consoles and digital audio workstations.   SSL is among the top 2 or 3 recording console manufacturers in the world of recording.In May 2008, Gabriel's Real World Studios, in partnership with Bowers & Wilkins, started the Bowers & Wilkins Music Club - now known as Society of Sound - a subscription-based music retail site. Albums are currently available in either Apple Lossless or Flac format. 
Activist for humanitarian causesIn 1986 he started what has become a longstanding association with Amnesty International, becoming a pioneering participant in all 28 of Amnesty's Human Rights Concerts — a series of music events and tours staged by the US Section of Amnesty International between 1986-1998.  He performed during the six-concert A Conspiracy of Hope US tour in June 1986; the twenty-concert Human Rights Now! world tour in 1988; the Chile: Embrace Of Hope Concert in 1990 and at The Paris Concert For Amnesty International in 1998.  He also performed in Amnesty's Secret Policeman's Ball benefit shows in collaboration with other artists and friends such as Lou Reed, David Gilmour and Youssou N'Dour; Gabriel closed those concerts performing his anti-apartheid anthem Biko. 
He spoke of his support for Amnesty on NBC's Today Show in 1986.  Inspired by the social activism he encountered in his work with Amnesty, in 1992 Gabriel co-founded WITNESS, a non-profit group that equips, trains and supports locally-based organizations worldwide to use video and the internet in human rights documentation and advocacy.In 1995, Gabriel and Cape Verdean human rights activist Vera Duarte were awarded the North-South Prize in its inaugural year.     
In the late 1990s, Gabriel and entrepreneur Richard Branson discussed with Nelson Mandela their idea of a small, dedicated group of leaders, working objectively and without any vested personal interest to solve difficult global conflicts.On 18 July 2007, in Johannesburg, South Africa, Nelson Mandela announced the formation of a new group, Global Elders, in a speech he delivered on the occasion of his 89th birthday. The present members of this group are Desmond Tutu, Graça Machel, Kofi Annan, Ela Bhatt, Lakhdar Brahimi, Gro Harlem Brundtland, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Jimmy Carter, Mary Robinson, Muhammad Yunus, and Aung San Suu Kyi (with an empty chair for her). The Elders will be independently funded by a group of "Founders", including Branson and Gabriel.Desmond Tutu serves as the chair of the Elders, who will use their collective skills to catalyse peaceful resolutions to long-standing conflicts, articulate new approaches to global issues that are causing or may later cause immense human suffering, and share wisdom by helping to connect voices all over the world. They will work together over the next several months to consider carefully which specific issues they will confront.In November 2007 Gabriel's non-profit group WITNESS launched The Hub, a participatory media site for human rights.In September 2008 Gabriel was named as the recipient of Amnesty International’s 2008 Ambassador of Conscience Award. In the same month, he received Quadriga United We Care award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadić, Eckart Höfling and Wikipedia. The award was presented to him by Queen Silvia of Sweden. Gabriel lent his support to the campaign to release Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, an Iranian woman sentenced to death by stoning after being convicted of committing adultery. 
PoliticsAt the 1997 general election, Gabriel declared his support for the Labour Party, which won that election by a landslide after 18 years out of power, led by Tony Blair. In 1998, Gabriel was named in a list of the biggest private financial donors to Labour.  In 2003, he revealed he had voted for Labour and admired what they had done for health and education but distanced himself from the Labour government over Tony Blair’s support for George W. Bush and Britain’s involvement in the Iraq War, which he strongly opposed, although he continued to believe Blair was a man of conscience.  Quoted in The Mirror newspaper, he said: This is a fundamental issue of life and death and I very much think the Prime Minister is in the wrong. I'm also sure George W. Bush is an affable bloke but he's highly dangerous and I wish America was in the hands of someone else. To put oil interests ahead of human life is appalling. War is always terrible but unjustified war is obscene and on present evidence that is what we are facing. People want peace and I think it's great that the Mirror is leading this campaign. I think the consequences of this war would be the biggest threat to world peace in my lifetime...There is a slogan which says: 'Peace is what happens when you respect the rights of others'. Iraqis have rights too.  In 2005, Gabriel gave a Green Party of England and Wales general election candidate special permission to record a cover of his song "Don't Give Up" for his campaign. In 2010, The Guardian described Gabriel as "a staunch advocate of proportional representation". In 2012, Gabriel condemned the use of his music by American talk radio personality Rush Limbaugh during a controversial segment in which Limbaugh vilified Georgetown University law student Sandra Fluke. A statement on behalf of Gabriel read: "Peter was appalled to learn that his music was linked to Rush Limbaugh's extraordinary attack on Sandra Fluke. It is obvious from anyone that knows Peter's work that he would never approve such a use. He has asked his representatives to make sure his music is withdrawn and especially from these unfair, aggressive and ignorant comments." 
Personal lifeGabriel has two daughters with his first wife Jill Moore: Anna-Marie (born 26 July 1974) and Melanie Gabriel (born 23 August 1976). Married on 17 March 1971, they divorced in 1987. Moore's father was Lord Moore of Wolvercote. Anna-Marie is a filmmaker and Melanie is a musician. Anna-Marie filmed and directed the Growing Up On Tour: A Family Portrait and Still Growing Up: Live & Unwrapped DVDs. Melanie has been a backing vocalist in her father's band since 2002.  In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Gabriel lived with actress Rosanna Arquette but they never married. Gabriel also has two sons with Meabh Flynn: Isaac Ralph (born 27 September 2001) and Luc (born 5 July 2008). Gabriel and Flynn have been married since 9 June 2002.Gabriel has resided for many years in the county of Wiltshire in England, where he also runs his Real World Studios. He previously lived in the Woolley Valley near Bath, Somerset. In 2010 he joined a campaign to stop an agricultural development at the valley, which had also inspired his first solo single "Solsbury Hill" in 1977. 
Appearances: 2005–presentGabriel actively coordinated and performed at the Eden Project Live 8 concert in July 2005. 
In his earliest days, Gabriel played flute on Cat Stevens's first album on the Island records label, Mona Bone Jakon as a "nervous session musician". Stevens, now known as Yusuf Islam, joined him on stage 33 years after that experience, in Johannesburg during Nelson Mandela's 46664 concert. The two performed the Stevens hit "Wild World".A double DVD set, Still Growing Up: Live & Unwrapped, was released in October 2005. FIFA asked Gabriel and Brian Eno to organise an opening ceremony for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals in Germany, planned to take place a couple of days before the start of the tournament; however, the show was cancelled in January 2006 by FIFA.Rumours of a possible reunion of the original Genesis line-up began circulating in 2004 after Phil Collins stated in an interview that he was open to the idea of sitting back behind the drums and "let Peter be the singer." The classic line-up has only reformed for a live performance once before, in 1982. However, the group did work together to create a new version of the 1974 song "The Carpet Crawlers", ultimately released on the Turn It On Again: The Hits album as "The Carpet Crawlers 1999". Gabriel later met with other Genesis band members, to discuss a possible reunion tour of The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway. He chose to opt out of a reunion tour, and his former bandmates, Collins, Banks, and Rutherford chose to tour as Genesis without him.At the opening ceremonies of the Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy, Gabriel performed John Lennon's "Imagine" during the opening of the festivities  on 10 February 2006.In October 2006, Gabriel was given the first Pioneer Award at the BT Digital Music Awards, an award presented in recognition of his "profound and lasting influence on the development of digital music."In November 2006, the Seventh World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in Rome presented Gabriel with the Man of Peace award. The award, presented by former President of the USSR and Nobel Peace Prize winner Mikhail Gorbachev and Walter Veltroni, Mayor of Rome, was an acknowledgement of Gabriel's extensive contribution and work on behalf of human rights and peace. The award was presented in the Giulio Cesare Hall of the Campidoglio in Rome. At the end of the year, he was awarded the Q magazine Lifetime Achievement Award, presented to him by American musician Moby. In an interview published in the magazine to accompany the award, Gabriel's contribution to music was described as "vast and enduring."Gabriel took on a project with the BBC World Service's competition "The Next Big Thing" to find the world's best young band. Gabriel is judging the final six young artists with William Orbit, Geoff Travis and Angélique Kidjo.The Times reported on 21 January 2007, that Peter Gabriel had announced that he planned to release his next album in the U.S. without the aid of a record company. Gabriel, an early pioneer of digital music distribution, had raised £2 million towards recording and 'shipping' his next album, Big Blue Ball in a venture with investment boutique Ingenious Media. Gabriel is expected to earn double the money that he would through a conventional record deal. Commercial director Duncan Reid of Ingenious explains the business savvy of the deal, saying, "If you're paying a small distribution fee and covering your own marketing costs, you enjoy the lion's share of the proceeds of the album. Gabriel is expected to outsource CD production for worldwide release through Warner Bros. Records. The new album deal covers the North America territory, where Gabriel is currently out of contract. The album Big Blue Ball was launched in America thanks to a venture capital trust initiative. Bosses at London-based firm Ingenious raised more than $4 million (GBP 2 million) to help promote the release in the United States. The venture capitalists, Gabriel and his Real World Limited partners, have created a new joint venture company, High Level Recordings Limited, to oversee the release of the album, which took place in 2008. Gabriel appeared on a nationwide tour for the album in 2009. On 24 May 2007, he was honoured with the Ivor Novello Award for lifetime achievement. Gabriel was a judge for the 6th and 8th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists. In February 2009, Gabriel announced that he would not be performing on the 2008 Academy Awards telecast because producers of the show were limiting his performance of "Down to Earth" from WALL-E to 65 seconds. John Legend and the Soweto Gospel Choir performed the song in his stead.Gabriel's 2009 tour of Mexico and South America included visiting Mexico, Argentina, Chile, Peru, and Venezuela. His first ever performance in Peru was held in Lima on 20 March 2009, during his second visit to the country. His concert in Mexico City, on 27 March 2009, attracted more than 38,000 fans.On 25 July 2009, he played at WOMAD Charlton Park, his only European performance of the year, to promote Witness. The show included two tracks from the then-forthcoming Scratch My Back: Paul Simon's "The Boy in the Bubble" and The Magnetic Fields' "The Book of Love". On 5 October 2011 at the Royal Festival Hall, London Gabriel appeared at the end of an interview of President Carter by Channel 4 News presenter, Jon Snow, to lead the 2,500-strong audience in a rendition of happy birthday to mark the President turning 87.On 9 November 2011 he appeared and performed on CBS's Late Show with David Letterman.
Discography 

Peter Gabriel 1 (Car) (1977)
Peter Gabriel 2 (Scratch) (1978)
Peter Gabriel 3 (Melt) (1980) / Ein deutsches Album (1980)
Peter Gabriel 4 (Security) (1982) / Deutsches Album (1982)
Birdy (1985)
So (1986)
Passion (1989)
Us (1992)
OVO (2000)
Long Walk Home (2002)
Up (2002)
Scratch My Back (2010)
New Blood (2011)


See also

List of best selling music artists
List of artists who reached number one on the Hot 100 (U.S.)
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance chart
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Mainstream Rock chart


References 
External links 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audio interview at BBC Wiltshire
Peter Gabriel takes part in a panel at the Global Philanthropy Forum video

 
 
 
  
  
DEFAULTSORT





















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Laurel and Hardy
 
Laurel and Hardy were one of the most popular and critically acclaimed comedy double acts of the early Classical Hollywood era of American cinema. Composed of thin Englishman Stan Laurel (1890–1965) and large American Oliver Hardy (1892–1957), they became well known during the late 1920s to the mid-1940s for their slapstick comedy, with Laurel playing the clumsy and childlike friend of the pompous Hardy.   They made over 100 films together, initially two-reelers (short films) before expanding into feature length films in the 1930s. Their films include Sons of the Desert (1933), the Academy Award winning short film The Music Box (1932), Babes in Toyland (1934), and Way Out West (1937). Hardy's catchphrase "Well, here's another nice mess you've gotten me into!" is still widely recognized.Oft misquoted as "another fine mess", see section on Catchphrases.Prior to the double act both were established actors with Laurel appearing in over 50 films and Hardy in over 250 films. Although the two comedians first worked together on the film The Lucky Dog (1921), this was a chance pairing and it was not until 1926, when both separately signed contracts with the Hal Roach film studio, that they began appearing in movie shorts together. Smith 1984, p. 24.   Laurel and Hardy officially  became a team the following year in the silent short film Putting Pants on Philip (1927). The pair remained with the Roach studio until 1940, then appeared in eight "B" comedies for 20th Century Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from 1941 to 1945. McGarry 1992, p. 67.  After finishing their movie commitments at the end of 1944, they concentrated on stage shows, embarking on a music hall tour of England, Ireland, and Scotland.  In 1950 they made their last film, a French/Italian co-production called Atoll K, before retiring from the screen. In total they appeared together in 107 films. They starred in 40 short sound films, 32 short silent films and 23 full-length feature films, and made 12 guest or cameo appearances, including the recently discovered Galaxy of Stars promotional film (1936).A common comedy routine was a tit-for-tat fight. Their silent film Big Business (1929), which includes one of these routines, was added to the Library of Congress as a national treasure in 1992. Notable Laurel traits included crying like a baby while being berated and scratching his hair when in shock. On December 1, 1954, the team made their only American television appearance, surprised by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program, This Is Your Life.The works of Laurel and Hardy have been re-released in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals, 16mm and 8mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home videos since the 1930s. They were voted the seventh greatest comedy act in a 2005 UK poll by fellow comedians. The duo's signature tune, known variously as "The Cuckoo Song", "Ku-Ku", or "The Dance of the Cuckoos", played on the opening credits of their films. The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert, after a fraternal society in their film of the same name.
Before the teaming

Stan Laurel 
Stan Laurel (June 16, 1890 – February 23, 1965) was born Arthur Stanley Jefferson in Ulverston, Lancashire, England.  His father, Arthur Joseph Jefferson, was a theatrical entrepreneur and theatre owner in northern England and Scotland, who with his wife was a major force in the industry.  Laurel was born into a family with theatre in its blood.  In 1905 the Jefferson family moved to Glasgow to be closer to their business mainstay, The Metropole Theatre,  with Laurel making his stage debut in a Glasgow hall called the Panoptikon, a month short of his 16th birthday.  Arthur Jefferson secured Laurel his first acting job with a theatrical juvenile company, Levy and Cardwell, specialising in Christmas Pantomimes.  In 1909 he was employed by Britain's leading comedy impresario, Fred Karno,  working as a supporting actor and as an understudy of Charlie Chaplin.  Laurel said of Karno "There was no one like him. He had no equal. His name was box-office." In 1912, Laurel left England with a Fred Karno Troupe, to tour the United States of America. Laurel expected the tour to be merely a pleasant interval in his life before returning to London; however, he had, in actuality, emigrated.  In 1917 Laurel was teamed with Mae Dahlberg: they worked as a double act for stage and film and were common law husband and wife.  Laurel made his film debut with Dahlberg in Nuts in May (1917).  It was while working with her that he started using the stage name Stan Laurel, changing his name legally in 1931.  Dahlberg held Laurel's career back because she demanded parts in Laurel's films and her tempestuous nature made her difficult to work with; dressing room arguments between the two were common, so film producer Joe Rock paid her to leave Laurel and return to her native Australia.  In 1925 Laurel joined the Hal Roach film studio as a director and writer and between May 1925 and September 1926 he was credited in at least 22 films.  Laurel starred in over 50 films for various producers before teaming up with Hardy,  but without Hardy he experienced only modest success because it was difficult for producers, writers and directors to figure out what character he might be playing, and American audiences knew him either as a "nutty burglar" or as a Charlie Chaplin imitator. 
Oliver Hardy 
Oliver Hardy (January 18, 1892 – August 7, 1957) was born Norvell Hardy in Harlem, Georgia.  He took his father's first name, calling himself "Oliver Norvell Hardy."  His offscreen nicknames were "Ollie" and "Babe." Hardy's nickname "Babe" originated from an Italian barber near the Lubin Studios in Jacksonville, Florida, who would rub Hardy's face with talcum powder and say, "That's nice a baby!" which the other Lubin actors mimicked.  Hardy was billed as "Babe Hardy" in his early films. McCabe 1989, p. 19.  By his late teens, Hardy was a popular stage singer, and he operated his own movie house in Milledgeville, Georgia, the Palace Theater, partly financed by his mother. Bergen 1992, p. 26. Seeing film comedies inspired him with an urge to take up comedy himself and in 1913 he began working with Lubin Motion Pictures in Jacksonville, Florida. He started out by helping around the studio with lights, props and other duties, gradually learning the craft as a script-clerk.  Around the same time, he married his first wife, Madelyn Salosihn. Everson 2000, p. 22.  In 1914, Hardy acted as Babe in his first film called Outwitting Dad.  Between 1914 and 1916,  Hardy made 177 shorts as Babe with the Vim Comedy Company, which were released up to the end of 1917.  Exhibiting a versatility in playing heroes, villains and even female characters, Hardy became much in demand as a supporting actor, comic villain or second banana. For the next 10 years he memorably assisted star comics Billy West, a Charlie Chaplin imitator, Jimmy Aubrey, Larry Semon and Charley Chase.  In total, Hardy starred or co-starred in more than 250 silent shorts, about 150 of which have been lost. While in New York, his abortive effort to enlist in 1917 led him and his wife, Madelyn, to seek new opportunities in California. 
History

Films 

 The first film pairing of the two comedians, although as separate performers, took place in The Lucky Dog (1921).  The exact date the film was produced isn't recorded, but film historian Bo Bergulund dated it between late 1920 and January 1921.  The association was so casual that based upon interviews given in the 1930s both had forgotten it entirely.  The plot sees Laurel befriended by a stray dog who after a number of lucky escapes saves him from being blown up by a stick of dynamite, while Hardy is a mugger attempting to rob him.  Several years later, both comedians had separately signed for the Hal Roach film studio and next appeared in 45 Minutes From Hollywood (1926). Hal Roach was the most important person in their film careers; he brought them together officially as a team and paid their wages for over 20 years.  Charley Rogers worked closely with the three men for many years and said "It could not have happened if Laurel, Hardy and Roach had not met at the right place and at the right time.  Their first "official" film together was Putting Pants on Philip (1927).  The plot sees Laurel as Philip, a young Scottish man newly arrived in the United States in full kilted splendor: after various mishaps surrounding the kilt, his uncle, played by Hardy, tries to put him in trousers. Laurel said  to John McCabe: "Of all the questions we're asked, the most frequent is how did we come together? I always explain that we just came together naturally."  Laurel and Hardy were joined by accident and grew by indirection.  In 1926 both were part of the Roach Comedy All Stars - a group of actors of similar standing who took part in a series of films; quite unwittingly Laurel and Hardy's parts became larger and the parts of their fellow stars became less, because Laurel and Hardy were the best actors.  The teaming was suggested by Leo McCarey, who was their supervising director between 1927 and 1930; during this period McCarey and Laurel jointly devised the team's format.  After the teaming they played the same characters for 30 years. Although Hal Roach employed writers and directors such as H. M. Walker, Leo McCarey, James Parrott and James W. Horne on Laurel and Hardy films, Laurel would rewrite entire sequences or scripts, have the cast and crew improvise on the sound stage, and meticulously review the footage for editing. Mitchell 2010, p. 28.  By 1929 Laurel was the head writer. The writing sessions were gleeful chaos; Stan had three or four writers who joined him in a perpetual game of 'Can You Top This?'  As Laurel so obviously relished writing gags, Hardy was more than happy to leave the job to his partner.  From this point Laurel was also the uncredited film director. He ran the Laurel and Hardy set no matter who was in the director's chair, but never felt compelled to assert his authority. Roach remarked "Laurel bossed the production. With any director if Laurel said 'I don't like this idea,' the director didn't say 'Well, you're going to do it anyway.' That was understood."  As Laurel made so many suggestions there wasn't much left for the credited director to do. In 1929 the silent era of film was coming to an end and most silent-film actors saw their careers decline with the advent of sound.  Silent film actors failed to make the transition because they decided their prime duty was to tell stories in words, and they misused sound through over-emphasis, or there was poor recording. Laurel and Hardy avoided this pitfall because they decided to continue making primarily visual films. McCabe 1987, p. 153.  They did not ignore sound but they were not ruled by it.  They proved skillful in their melding of visual and verbal humor,  and made a seamless transition to the talking era in their first sound film Unaccustomed As We Are (1929). The title took its name from the familiar phrase "Unaccustomed as we are to public speaking".  In the opening dialogue Laurel and Hardy began by spoofing the very slow and self conscious speech of the early talking actors, a routine they would use regularly. Laurel and Hardy's first starring feature film  was Pardon Us (1931).  The most memorable Laurel and Hardy film is The Music Box (1932), the image of the duo forever pushing a piano up a tremendous flight of steps has stuck in the public consciousness.  The film won an Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Subject in 1932.  While many enthusiasts claim the superiority of The Music Box, their silent film Big Business (1929) is by far the most consistently acclaimed.  The plot sees Laurel and Hardy as Christmas tree salesman involved in a classic tit-for-tat battle with James Finlayson, eventually destroying his house and their car.  Big Business was added to the Library of Congress in the United States as a national treasure in 1992.  Sons of the Desert (1933) is considered Laurel and Hardy's best feature film. Babes in Toyland (1934) retains a timeless appeal and remains a perennial on American T.V. at Christmas.  Hal Roach spoke scathingly about the film and Laurel's behavior during its making. Laurel was unhappy with Roach's plot and after an argument was allowed to make the film his own way. The rift permanently damaged Roach-Laurel relations to the point that Roach said that after Toyland he no longer wished to produce Laurel and Hardy films, although their association continued for another six years. Hoping for greater artistic freedom, Laurel and Hardy split with Roach and signed with major studios 20th Century-Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. However, the working conditions were now completely different, as they were hired only as actors, relegated to the B-film divisions, and initially not allowed to improvise or contribute to the scripts. When the films proved popular, the studios allowed the team more input with Laurel and Hardy starring in eight features through 1944. These films, while not considered the team's best, were extremely successful. Budgeted at $250,000 to $300,000 each, the films earned millions at the box office. The films were so profitable that Fox kept making Laurel and Hardy comedies after discontinuing its other "B" series. Laurel and Hardy made one final film together, Atoll K (1951), a French-Italian co-production directed by Leo Joannon, which was plagued by language barriers, production problems, and both Laurel and Hardy's grave health issues. During shooting, Hardy began to lose weight precipitously and developed an irregular heartbeat while Laurel experienced painful prostate complications. McGarry 1992, p. 73.  Critics were disappointed with its storyline, English dubbing, and Laurel's sickly physical appearance.  The film was not a success, and brought an end to Laurel and Hardy's film careers. A number of their films were re-shot with Laurel and Hardy talking in Spanish, Italian, French or German.  The plots for these films were similar to the English language version although the supporting cast were often native language actors. Laurel and Hardy could not speak a foreign language and they received voice coaching to reproduce their lines. Pardon Us (1931) was re-shot in all four foreign languages. Blotto (1930), Hog Wild (1930) and Be Big! (1931) had French and Spanish versions. Night Owls (1930) had Spanish and Italian versions. Below Zero (1930) and Chickens Come Home (1931) only Spanish version.Most of the Laurel and Hardy films survive, and have never gone out of circulation permanently. Three of their 107 films are considered lost, as they have not been seen in full since the 1930s.  The silent Hats Off (1927) has vanished completely. The first half of Now I'll Tell One (1927) is lost and the second half has yet to be released on video.  In the operatic Technicolor musical The Rogue Song (1930) Laurel and Hardy appear in 10 sequences, only one of which is known to exist along with the complete soundtrack. 
Style of comedy and characterizations 
The humor of Laurel and Hardy was generally visual with slapstick used for emphasis. They often had physical arguments with each other, which were quite complex and involved cartoon violence, and their characters preclude them from making any real progress in even the simplest endeavors. Much of their comedy involves milking a joke, where a simple idea provides a basis from which to build several gags without following a defined narrative.Laurel and Hardy had an inherent physical contrariety. Stan Laurel was of average height and weight, but appeared small and slight next to Oliver Hardy, who was   tall Mitchell, Glenn. The Laurel & Hardy Encyclopedia. London: Batsford, 1995. ISBN 0-7134-7711-3  and weighed about 280 lb (127 kg) in his prime. Laurel kept his hair short on the sides and back, but let it grow long on top to create a natural "fright wig". At times of shock he would simultaneously cry while pulling up his hair. In contrast, Hardy's thinning hair was pasted on his forehead in spit curls and he wore a toothbrush moustache. To achieve a flat-footed walk, Laurel removed the heels from his shoes.  Both wore bowler hats, with Laurel's being narrower than Hardy's, and with a flattened brim. The characters' normal attire also called for wing collar shirts, with Hardy wearing a standard neck tie which he would twiddle and Laurel a bow tie. Hardy's sports jacket was too small for him and done up with one straining button, whereas Laurel's double breasted jacket was loose fitting.A common routine the team performed was a "tit-for-tat" fight with an adversary. This could be with their wives—often played by Mae Busch, Anita Garvin or Daphne Pollard—or with a neighbour, often played by Charlie Hall or James Finlayson. Laurel and Hardy would accidentally damage someone else's property, with the injured party retaliating by ruining something belonging to Laurel or Hardy. After calmly surveying the damage they would find something else to vandalize and conflict would escalate until both sides were simultaneously destroying property in front of each other. An early example of the routine occurs in their classic short, Big Business (1929), which was added to the Library of Congress as a national treasure in 1992, and one of their short films, which revolves entirely around such an altercation, was titled Tit for Tat (1935).One of their best-remembered dialogue routines was the "Tell me that again" routine. Laurel would tell Hardy a genuinely smart idea he had come up with, and Hardy would reply, "Tell me that again." Laurel would attempt to repeat the idea, but jumble it into utter nonsense. Hardy, who had difficulty understanding Laurel's idea when expressed clearly, would understand perfectly when hearing the jumbled version.While much of their comedy remained visual, various lines of humorous dialogue appeared in Laurel and Hardy's talking films. Some examples include:

"You can lead a horse to water, but a pencil must be led." (Laurel, Brats)
"I was dreaming I was awake, but I woke up and found meself asleep." (Laurel, Oliver the Eighth)
"A lot of weather we've been having lately." (Hardy, Way Out West)

In some cases, their comedy bordered on the surreal, a style Stan Laurel called "white magic".  For example, in Way Out West (1937), Laurel clenches his fist and pours tobacco into it, as if it were a pipe. Then, he flicks his thumb upward as if he held a lighter. His thumb ignites, and he matter-of-factly lights his "pipe." The amazed Hardy, seeing this, would unsuccessfully attempt to duplicate it throughout the rest of the film. Much later in the film, Hardy finally succeeds – only to be terrified when his thumb catches fire.Rather than showing Hardy suffering the pain of misfortunes such as falling down stairs or being beaten by a thug, banging and crashing sound effects were often used so the audience could visualize the scene for themselves.Why Girls Love Sailors (1927) was a significant film for Hardy because it gave him two of his most enduring trademarks. The first was his "tie-twiddle" to demonstrate embarrassment. Hardy, while acting, had been met with a pail of water in the face. He said "I had been expecting it, but I didn't expect it at that particular moment. It threw me mentally and I couldn't think what to do next, so I waved the tie in a kind of tiddly-widdly fashion to show embarrassment while trying to look friendly."   His second trademark was the "camera look" in which he breaks the fourth wall. Hardy said "I had to become exasperated, so I just stared right into the camera and registered my disgust" Offscreen, Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy were quite the opposite of their movie characters: Laurel was the industrious "idea man," while Hardy was more easygoing. Gehring 1990, p. 5. 
Final yearsAfter Atoll K, Laurel and Hardy took several months off, so that Laurel could recuperate. Upon their return to the European stage in 1952, they undertook a well-received series of public appearances in a short sketch Laurel had written called "A Spot of Trouble".  Hoping to repeat the success the following year, Laurel wrote a routine titled "Birds of a Feather" (in 1953).   On September 9, 1953, their boat arrived in Cobh, Ireland. Laurel recounted their reception:

The love and affection we found that day at Cobh was simply unbelievable. There were hundreds of boats blowing whistles and mobs and mobs of people screaming on the docks. We just couldn't understand what it was all about. And then something happened that I can never forget. All the church bells in Cobh started to ring out our theme song ["Dance of the Cuckoos"] and Babe [Oliver Hardy] looked at me and we cried. I'll never forget that day. Never. 


On December 1, 1954, the team made their only American television appearance, surprised by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program, This Is Your Life. Lured to the Knickerbocker Hotel as a subterfuge for a business meeting with producer Bernard Delfont, the doors opened to their suite #205, flooding the room with light and the voice of Edwards. The telecast was preserved on a kinescope and later released on home video. Partly due to the positive response from the television broadcast, the pair was renegotiating with Hal Roach Jr. for a series of color NBC Television specials to be called Laurel and Hardy's Fabulous Fables. However, plans for the specials were shelved, as the aging comedians suffered from declining health. McCabe 1975, p. 398. In 1955, Laurel and Hardy made their final public appearance together, taking part in This Is Music Hall, a BBC Television program about the Grand Order of Water Rats, a British variety organization. Laurel and Hardy provide a filmed insert during which they reminisce about their friends in British variety. They made their final appearance on camera in 1956 in a home movie titled "One Moment Please". The film was shot by a family friend at Laurel's home; it is without audio and lasts three minutes.Under doctor's orders to improve a heart condition, Hardy lost over   in 1956. Several strokes resulted in loss of mobility and speech. He died of a stroke on August 7, 1957. Longtime friend Bob Chatterton said Hardy weighed just   at the time of his death. Hardy was laid to rest at Pierce Brothers Valhalla Memorial Park, North Hollywood. Just after Hardy's death, Laurel and Hardy's films returned to movie theaters, as clips of their work were featured in Robert Youngson's silent-film compilation The Golden Age of Comedy. For the remaining eight years of his life, Stan Laurel refused to perform, even turning down Stanley Kramer's offer to make a cameo in his landmark 1963 movie, It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World. In 1960, Laurel was given a special Academy Award for his contributions to film comedy. Despite not appearing onscreen after Hardy's death, Laurel did contribute gags to several comedy filmmakers. Most of his writing was in the form of correspondence; he insisted on answering every fan letter personally. Late in life, he hosted many visitors of the new generation of comedians and celebrities, including Dick Cavett, Jerry Lewis, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau and Dick Van Dyke. Laurel lived until 1965, surviving to see the duo's work rediscovered through television and classic film revivals. He died on February 23 in Santa Monica, and is buried at Forest Lawn-Hollywood Hills in Los Angeles, California. 
Supporting castLaurel and Hardy's films included a memorable supporting cast, some of whom appeared regularly. 

Harry Bernard, played bit parts as waiter, bartender and cop.
Mae Busch played a formidable Mrs. Hardy, and some other characters.
Charley Chase, the Hal Roach film star and brother of James Parrott, Laurel and Hardy writer/director, made 4 appearances.
Baldwin Cooke played bit parts as waiter, bartender and cop.
James Finlayson, a small, balding, moustachioed Scotsman known for displays of indignation and squinting "double takes", made 33 appearances.
Anita Garvin was a memorable Mrs. Laurel.
Billy Gilbert, made many appearances, most notably in the classic The Music Box (1932).
Charlie Hall, who usually played angry "little men", appeared nearly 50 times.
Jean Harlow, the "Blonde Bombshell" had a small role in their short Double Whoopee (1929) and two other films, before her breakout stardom.
Arthur Housman made memorable appearances as a comic drunk.
Edgar Kennedy master of the "slow burn", often appeared as a cop, hostile neighbor or relative.
Walter Long played grizzled, physically threatening villains.
Sam Lufkin appeared several times.
Daphne Pollard was featured, mostly as Oliver's shrewish wife.
Charley Rogers, the English actor, appeared several times.
Tiny Sandford was a very tall and burly man who played authority figures, notably cops.
Thelma Todd appeared several times.
Ben Turpin the cross-eyed actor made two memorable appearances.
Peter Cushing, well before becoming a star in many memorable Hammer Horror Films made an appearance in A Chump at Oxford.


Music 
The duo's famous signature tune, known variously as "The Cuckoo Song", "Ku-Ku", or "The Dance of the Cuckoos", was composed by Roach musical director Marvin Hatley as the on-the-hour chime for the Roach studio radio station.  Laurel heard the tune on the station, and asked Hatley to use it as the Laurel and Hardy theme song. In Laurel's eyes, the song's melody represented Hardy's character (pompous and dramatic), while the harmony represented Laurel's own character (somewhat out of key, and only able to register two notes: "coo-coo").  The original theme, recorded by two clarinets in 1930, was re-recorded with a full orchestra in 1935. Leroy Shield composed the great majority of the music used in the Laurel and Hardy short sound films.  A compilation of songs from their films titled Trail of the Lonesome Pine was released in 1975. The title track was released as a single in the UK and reached #2 in the charts.
Influence and legacy

CatchphrasesThe catchphrase most used by Laurel and Hardy on film is: 
  
The phrase, which was earlier used by W. S. Gilbert in The Mikado (1885) and again in The Grand Duke (1896), was first used by Hardy in The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case (1930). In popular culture, the catchphrase is often misquoted as "Well, here's another fine mess you've gotten me into." The misquoted version of the phrase was never used by Hardy on film; the misunderstanding stems from the title of their film Another Fine Mess (1930). 
Numerous variations of the quote appeared on film. In Chickens Come Home (1931), Ollie says impatiently to Stan, "Well...." with Stan replying, "Here's another nice mess I've gotten you into." In Thicker than Water (1935) and The Fixer-Uppers (1935), the phrase becomes "Well, here's another nice kettle of fish you pickled me in!" In Saps at Sea (1940) it becomes "Well, here's another nice bucket of suds you've gotten me into!"Another regular catchphrase, cried out by Ollie, when in moments of distress, as Stan stands helplessly by, is "Why don't you do something to help me?" 
"D'oh!" is a catchphrase used by James Finlayson, the mustachioed Scottish actor who appeared in 33 Laurel and Hardy films. The phrase, expressing surprise, impatience, or incredulity, was the inspiration for "D'oh!" as spoken by the fictional character Homer Simpson in the long running animated comedy The Simpsons. Homer's first intentional use of "d'oh!" occurred in the Ullman short "Punching Bag" (1988). 
The Sons of the Desert 
The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert, after a fraternal society in their film of the same name (1933).  It was founded in New York City in 1965 by Laurel and Hardy biographers John McCabe, Orson Bean, Al Kilgore, Chuck McCann and  John Municino, with the sanction of Stan Laurel. Since the group's inception, well over 150 chapters of the organization have formed across North America, Europe and Australia. An Emmy-winning film documentary about the group, Revenge of the Sons of the Desert, has been released on DVD as part of The Laurel and Hardy Collection, Vol. 1.
Posthumous revivalsSince the 1930s, the works of Laurel and Hardy have been re-released in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals (broadcast, especially public television, and cable), 16mm and 8mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home video. After Stan Laurel's death in 1965, there were two major motion-picture tributes: Laurel and Hardy's Laughing '20s, Robert Youngson's compilation of the team's silent-film highlights; and The Great Race, a large-scale salute to slapstick which director Blake Edwards dedicated to "Mr. Laurel and Mr. Hardy." For many years the duo were impersonated by Jim MacGeorge (as Laurel) and Chuck McCann (as Hardy) in children's TV shows and television commercials for various products. There are two Laurel and Hardy museums, one in Laurel's birthplace, Ulverston, United Kingdom,  and the other in Hardy's birthplace, Harlem, Georgia, United States. Maurice Sendak showed three identical Oliver Hardy figures as bakers preparing cakes for the morning in his award-winning children's book In the Night Kitchen (1970).  This is treated as a clear example  of "interpretative illustration" wherein the comedians' inclusion harked back to the author's own childhood.Sendak described his early upbringing as sitting in movie houses fascinated by the Laurel and Hardy comedies.  The Beatles used cut-outs of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy as two of the cutout celebrity crowd for the cover of their 1967 album, Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.A 2005 poll by fellow comedians and comedy insiders of the top 50 comedians for The Comedian's Comedian, a TV documentary broadcast on UK's Channel 4, voted the duo the seventh greatest comedy act ever, making them the top double act on the list. Numerous colorized versions of copyright-free Laurel and Hardy features and shorts have been reproduced by a multitude of production studios. Although the results of adding color were often in dispute, many of the popular titles are currently only available in the colorized version. The color process often renders the print into an "unwatchable" state, while some scenes were altered or deleted, dependent on the source material used. Tooze, Gary. "Laurel & Hardy - The Collection (21-disc Box Set)." dvdbeaver.com. Retrieved: April 20, 2011.  Helpmates (1932) was the first film to undergo the process; it was experimented upon by Colorization Inc., a subsidiary of Hal Roach Studios in 1983. Colorization became a success for the studio and Helpmates was released on home video with the colorized version of The Music Box (1932) in 1986. The technology for this process was inferior compared to today's digital colorization technology. There were numerous continuity errors and garish color design choices. However the most significant criticism that these versions received revolved around their editing: whole scenes were altered or deleted altogether, changing the character of the film.Merchandiser Larry Harmon claimed ownership of Laurel's and Hardy's likenesses, and issued Laurel and Hardy toys and coloring books. He co-produced a series of Laurel and Hardy cartoons in 1966 with Hanna-Barbera Productions.  His animated versions of Laurel and Hardy guest-starred in a 1972 episode of Hanna-Barbera's The New Scooby-Doo Movies. In 1999, Harmon produced a direct-to-video feature, the live-action comedy The All-New Adventures of Laurel and Hardy: For Love or Mummy, with actors Bronson Pinchot and Gailard Sartain playing the lookalike nephews of the original Laurel and Hardy, Stanley Thinneus Laurel and Oliver Fatteus Hardy. 
Around the worldLaurel and Hardy are popular in many countries around the world, but often have been given different names, for example in Poland they are known as Flip and Flap (Flip i Flap), in Germany as "Dick und Doof"*, and in Italy as Stanlio e Ollio*.
Filmographies 

Laurel and Hardy filmography
Oliver Hardy filmography
Stan Laurel filmography


References

Notes 
Citations 
Bibliography 

Andrews, Robert, Famous Lines: A Columbia Dictionary of Familiar Quotations. New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-231-10218-6.
Barr, Charles. Laurel & Hardy (Movie Paperbacks ). Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1974, first edition 1967. ISBN 0-520-00085-4.
Bergen, Ronald. The Life and Times of Laurel and Hardy. New York: Smithmark, 1992. ISBN 0-8317-5459-1.
Cullen, Frank, Florence Hackman and Donald McNeilly. Vaudeville, Old and New: An Encyclopedia of Variety Performers in America. London: Routledge, 2007. ISBN 978-0-415-93853-2.
Everson, William K. The Complete Films of Laurel and Hardy. New York: Citadel, 2000, First edition 1967. ISBN 0-8065-0146-4.
Gehring, Wes D. Laurel & Hardy: A Bio-Bibliography. Burnham Bucks, UK: Greenwood Press, 1990. ISBN 978-0-313-25172-6.
Haines, Richard W. Technicolor Movies: The History of Dye Transfer Printing. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1993. ISBN 0-89950-856-1.
Lanes, Selma G. The Art of Maurice Sendak. New York: Harry N. Abrams; 2nd revised edition, 1998, first edition, 1980. ISBN 0-8109-8063-0.
Louvish, Simon. Stan and Ollie: The Roots of Comedy. London: Faber & Faber, 2001. ISBN 0-571-21590-4.
McCabe, John with Al Kilgore and Richard W. Bann. Laurel & Hardy.  New York: Bonanza Books, 1983, First edition 1975, E.P. Dutton. ISBN 978-0-491-01745-9.
McCabe, John. Mr. Laurel & Mr. Hardy: An Affectionate Biography. London: Robson Books, 2004, First edition 1961, ISBN 1-86105-606-0. Reprint: New York: Doubleday & Co., 1987, 1966.
McCabe, John. The Comedy World of Stan Laurel. New York: Robson Press, 2004, First edition 1974, Doubleday & Co. ISBN 978-0-940410-23-7.
McGarry, Annie. Laurel & Hardy. London: Bison Group, 1992. ISBN 0-86124-776-0.
MacGillivray, Scott. Laurel & Hardy: From the Forties Forward, Second Edition, Revised and Expanded. New York: iUniverse, 2009; First edition Lanham, Maryland: Vestal Press, 1998. ISBN 1-4401-7239-0.
McIver, Stuart B. Dreamers, Schemers and Scalawags. Sarasota, Florida: Pineapple Press Inc., 1998. ISBN 978-1-56164-155-0.
Mitchell, Glenn. The Laurel & Hardy Encyclopedia. New York: Batsford, 2010, First edition 1995. ISBN 978-1-905287-71-0.
Sagert, Kelly Boyer. Flappers: A Guide to an American Subculture. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood, 2010. ISBN 978-0-313-37690-0.
Smith, Leon. Following the Comedy Trail: A Guide to Laurel & Hardy and Our Gang Film Locations. Littleton, Massachusetts: G.J. Enterprises, 1984. ISBN 978-0-938817-05-5.
Skretvedt, Randy. Laurel and Hardy: The Magic Behind the Movies (2nd ed.) Anaheim, California: Past Times Publishing Co., 1996,ISBN 0-940410-29-X, First edition 1987, Moonstone Press.
 
Further reading 

Anobile, Richard J., ed. A Fine Mess: Verbal and Visual Gems from The Crazy World of Laurel & Hardy. New York: Crown Publishers. 1975. ISBN 0-517-52438-4.
Brooks, Leo M. The Laurel & Hardy Stock Company. Hilversum, Netherlands: Blotto Press. 1997. ISBN 90-901046-1-5.
Byron, Stuart and Elizabeth Weis, eds. The National Society of Film Critics on Movie Comedy. New York: Grossman/Viking, 1977. ISBN 978-0-670-49186-5.
Crowther, Bruce. Laurel and Hardy: Clown Princes of Comedy. New York: Columbus Books, 1987. ISBN 978-0-86287-344-8.
Durgnat, Raymond. "Beau Chumps and Church Bells" (essay)."  The Crazy Mirror: Hollywood Comedy and the American Image. New York: Dell Publishing, 1970. ISBN 978-0-385-28184-3.
Everson, William K. The Films of Hal Roach. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1971. ISBN 978-0-87070-559-5.
Gehring, Wes D. Film Clowns of the Depression: Twelve Defining Comic Performances. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Co., 2007. ISBN 978-0-7864-2892-2.
Guiles, Fred Lawrence. Stan: The Life of Stan Laurel. New York: Stein & Day, 1991, First edition 1980. ISBN 978-0-8128-8528-6.
Harness, Kyp. The Art of Laurel and Hardy: Graceful Calamity in the Films. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, 2006. ISBN 0-7864-2440-0.
Kanin, Garson. Together Again!: Stories of the Great Hollywood Teams. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1981. ISBN 978-0-385-17471-8.
Kerr, Walter. The Silent Clowns. New York: Da Capo Press, 1990, First edition 1975, Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-306-80387-1.
Lahue, Kalton C. World of Laughter: The Motion Picture Comedy Short, 1910-1930. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1966. ISBN 978-0-8061-0693-9.
Maltin, Leonard. The Great Movie Comedians. New York: Crown Publishers, 1978. ISBN 978-0-517-53241-6.
Maltin, Leonard. The Laurel & Hardy Book (The Curtis Films Series). Sanibel Island, FL: Ralph Curtis Books, 1973.
Maltin, Leonard. Movie Comedy Teams. New York: New American Library, 1985, First edition 1970. ISBN 978-0-452-25694-1.
Maltin, Leonard, Selected Short Subjects (first published as The Great Movie Shorts. New York: Crown Publishers, 1972.) New York: Da Capo Press, 1983. ISBN 978-0-452-25694-1
Marriot, A.J. Laurel & Hardy: The British Tours. Hitchen, Herts, UK: AJ Marriot, 1993. ISBN 0-9521308-0-7.
Mast, Gerald. The Comic Mind: Comedy and the Movies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979, First edition 1973. ISBN 978-0-226-50978-5.
McCabe, John. Babe: The Life of Oliver Hardy. London: Robson Books, 2004, First edition 1989, Citadel. ISBN 1-86105-781-4.
McCaffrey, Donald W. "Duet of Incompetence" from The Golden Age of Sound Comedy: Comic Films and Comedians of the Thirties. New York: A.S. Barnes, 1973. ISBN 978-0-498-01048-4.
McIntyre, Willie. The Laurel & Hardy Digest: A Cocktail of Love and Hisses. Ayrshire, Scotland: Willie McIntyre, 1998. ISBN 978-0-9532958-0-7.
Nollen, Scott Allen. The Boys: The Cinematic World of Laurel and Hardy. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Co., 1989. ISBN 978-0-7864-1115-3.
Robb, Brian J. The Pocket Essential Laurel & Hardy. Manchester, UK: Pocket Essentials, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84243-285-3.
Robinson, David. The Great Funnies: A History of Film Comedy. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1969. ISBN 978-0-289-79643-6.
Sanders, Jonathan. Another Fine Dress: Role Play in the Films of Laurel and Hardy. London: Cassell, 1995. ISBN 978-0-304-33196-3.
Scagnetti, Jack. The Laurel & Hardy Scrapbook. New York: Jonathan David Publishers, 1982. ISBN 978-0-8246-0278-9.
Sendak, Maurice. In the Night Kitchen. New York: HarperCollins, First edition 1970. ISBN 0-06-026668-6.
Staveacre, Tony. Slapstick!: The Illustrated Story. London: Angus & Robertson Publishers, 1987. ISBN 978-0-207-15030-2.
Stone, Rob et al. Laurel or Hardy: The Solo Films of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy. Manchester, New Hampshire: Split Reel, 1996. ISBN 0-9652384-0-7.
Ward, Richard Lewis. A History of the Hal Roach Studios. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0-8093-2637-2.
Weales, Gerald. Canned Goods as Caviar: American Film Comedy of the 1930s. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985. ISBN 978-0-226-87664-1.
 
External links 

 
 
The Official Sons of the Desert Website
The Official Laurel and Hardy Website
Laurel and Hardy Films Official Website
Laurel and Hardy Central.com
Laurel and Hardy Forum.com
The Laurel and Hardy Discussion Group on Yahoo!Groups
Another Nice Mess: The Films of Laurel & Hardy
 
  
DEFAULTSORT







  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Keith Emerson
 
 Keith Noel Emerson (born 2 November 1944, Todmorden, West Yorkshire) is an English keyboard player and composer. Formerly a member of the Keith Emerson Trio, John Brown's Bodies, The T-Bones, The V.I.P.'s, P.P. Arnold's backing band, and The Nice (which evolved from P.P. Arnold's band), he was a founder of Emerson, Lake & Palmer (ELP), one of the early supergroups, in 1970. Following the breakup of ELP, circa 1979, Emerson had modest success with Emerson, Lake & Powell in the 1980s as well as with 3, with the album To the Power of Three. ELP reunited during the early 1990s, releasing the album Black Moon. Emerson also reunited The Nice in 2002 for a tour. His latest album, Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla, was released in 2008.Along with contemporaries Richard Wright of Pink Floyd, Tony Banks of Genesis, Rick Wakeman of Yes and Jon Lord of Deep Purple, Emerson is widely regarded as one of the top keyboard players of the progressive rock era.       Allmusic refers to Emerson as "perhaps the greatest, most technically accomplished keyboardist in rock history".  "Keith Emerson has proven himself perhaps the greatest, most technically accomplished keyboardist in rock history." 
Biography 

Emerson grew up in the seaside resort of Worthing, West Sussex, England. As a child, he learned western classical music, from which he derived a lot of inspiration to create his own style, combining classical music, jazz, and rock themes. Emerson became intrigued with the Hammond organ after hearing jazz organist Jack McDuff perform "Rock Candy" and it subsequently became his instrument of choice for performing in the late 1960s. This blending of elements is illustrated in his participation in the 1969 Music From Free Creek "supersession" project, where Emerson performs with drummer Mitch Mitchell and bassist Chuck Rainey covering, among other tracks, the Eddie Harris instrumental "Freedom Jazz Dance".Emerson acquired his first Hammond organ when he was 15 or 16, an L-100, on hire purchase The flamboyance that Emerson came to be known for began by chance when a fight broke out during a V.I.P.s performance in France. The band told him to keep playing so he made some explosion and machine gun sounds with his Hammond organ, which stopped the fight; everyone looked on with amazement. The other band members told him to do it at the next concert, which he did with success.   Emerson first heard the Moog when a record shop owner played Switched-On Bach for him. Emerson said: "My God that's incredible, what is that played on?" The owner then showed him the album cover. So I said, "What is that?" And he said, "That's the Moog synthesizer." My first impression was that it looked a bit like electronic skiffle." Without one of his own, Emerson borrowed Mike Vickers' Moog for an upcoming Nice concert at the Royal Festival Hall, London with the Royal Philharmonic. Mike helped patch the Moog and the concert was a great success. Emerson's performance of Also sprach Zarathustra from the recently released 2001: A Space Odyssey was a show stopper. Emerson: "I thought this was great. I've got to have one of these." With ELP's record deal with Atlantic came funds to buy the Moog. Keith: "It cost a lot of money and it arrived and I excitedly got it out of the box stuck it on the table and thought, 'Wow That's Great! a Moog synthesizer [pause] How do you switch it on?...There were all these leads and stuff, there was no instruction manual." Mike Vickers came through by patching it to produce six sounds and those six sounds became the foundation of ELP's sound. In 1969, Emerson incorporated the Moog modular synthesizer into his battery of keyboards. While other artists such as The Beatles and The Rolling Stones had used the Moog in studio recordings, Emerson was the first artist to tour with one. Emerson's use of the Moog was so important to the development of new models that he was given prototypes, such as the Constellation he took on one tour  and the Apollo, which had its debut on the opening track of Brain Salad Surgery, "Jerusalem."The Moog was a temperamental device; the oscillators went out of tune with temperature change. Emerson: "I had my faithful roady Rocky tune the instrument to A 440 just prior to the audience coming in, but once the audience came into the auditorium and the temperature rose up then everything went out of tune." 

His willingness to experiment with the Moog led to unexpected results, such as the time he stumbled into the signature sound for Hoedown, one of ELP's most popular tunes. Emerson: "We'd started working on that arrangement and then I hit, I don't know what, I switched a blue button and I put a patch cord in there, but anyway 'whoooeee.'" The so-called "Monster Moog," built from numerous modules, weighed in at a whopping 550 pounds, stood 10 feet tall and took 4 roadies to move. Even with its unpredictability, it became an indispensable component of not only ELP's concerts but also Emerson's. He is known for his technical skill and for his live antics, including using knives to wedge down specific keys of his Hammond organ during solos, playing the organ upside down while having it lie over him and backwards while standing behind it, and has cited guitarist Jimi Hendrix and English organist Don Shinn as his chief theatrical influences. He also employed a special rig to rotate his piano end-over-end while he was playing it, though this of course is purely for visual effect, as a piano cannot operate as an instrument while upside down.Emerson has performed several notable rock arrangements of classical compositions, ranging from J. S. Bach via Modest Mussorgsky to 20th century composers such as Béla Bartók, Aaron Copland, Leoš Janáček and Alberto Ginastera. Occasionally Emerson has quoted from classical and jazz works without giving credit, particularly early in his career, from the late 1960s until 1972. The song "Rondo" by The Nice is a 4/4 interpretation of "Blue Rondo à la Turk" by the Dave Brubeck Quartet, originally in 9/8 time signature. The piece is introduced by an extensive quote from Bach's Italian Concerto, third movement. In fact, considering the Bach and Emerson's own improvisations, the Brubeck contribution is merely the anchoring theme.On ELP's eponymous first album, Emerson's classical quotes went largely uncredited. "The Barbarian" is heavily influenced by "Allegro barbaro" by Bartók, and "Knife Edge" was virtually a note-for-note restatement of "Sinfonietta" by Janáček. Note-for-note extracts were taken from pieces by Bartók, Janáček and Bach, mixed in with some original material, and credited completely to Emerson, Lake, Palmer and roadie Richard Fraser. By 1971, with the releases Pictures at an Exhibition and Trilogy, Emerson began to fully credit classical composers, Modest Mussorgsky for the piano piece which inspired the first album, and Aaron Copland for "Hoedown" on the second. Emerson was adamant that he did not use Maurice Ravel's orchestration of Pictures at an Exhibition in developing his own version.
Emerson provided music for a number of films since 1980, including Dario Argento's Inferno and World of Horror, the 1981 thriller Nighthawks and, more recently, Godzilla: Final Wars. He was also the composer for the short-lived 1994 animated television series Iron Man.In 1990 Emerson toured with The Best, a short-lived supergroup which also included John Entwistle, Joe Walsh, Jeff "Skunk" Baxter and Simon Phillips.In 2002 Emerson re-formed and toured with The Nice, though performing a longer set of ELP music using a backing band including guitarist/vocalist Dave Kilminster.In 2004, Emerson published his autobiography entitled Pictures of an Exhibitionist, which dealt with his entire career, particularly focusing on his early days with The Nice, and his nearly career-ending nerve-graft surgery in 1993.  Emerson was the headliner of both the first and third Moogfest, a festival held in honour of Robert Moog at the B.B. King Blues Club & Grill in New York City in 2004 and 2006 respectively.  Emerson opened the Led Zeppelin reunion/Ahmet Ertegun tribute concert at the O2 Arena in London on 10 December 2007, along with Chris Squire and Alan White (Yes) and Simon Kirke (Bad Company/Free). The supergroup played the new arrangement of "Fanfare for the Common Man".The album Keith Emerson Band Featuring Marc Bonilla was released in August 2008. He toured with his own band in Russia, the Baltic States and Japan between August and October 2008. The tour band members were Marc Bonilla, Travis Davis and Tony Pia. On 30 June 2009, Emerson appeared as a guest during Spinal Tap's 'One Night Only World Tour' at Wembley Arena, during the songs "Short And Sweet" and "Heavy Duty".In March 2010, Emerson received a Frankfurt Music Prize from the city of Frankfurt.  In the same month, Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra made a premier performance of "Tarkus" arranged by a renowned Japanese composer Takashi Yoshimatsu.
Emerson toured with Greg Lake in the US and Canada during spring of 2010, doing a series of "An Intimate Evening with Emerson and Lake" duo shows in which they performed newly arranged versions of the music of Emerson, Lake & Palmer, The Nice, and King Crimson as well as Emerson's new original composition.On 25 July 2010, a one-off Emerson, Lake & Palmer reunion concert closed the High Voltage Festival as the main act in Victoria Park, East London to commemorate the band's 40th anniversary.In September 2010, Emerson released a message stating "During a routine medical examination, a colonoscopy revealed a rather dangerous polyp in my lower colon. It is of the conclusion of the doctors here in London that I must undergo surgery immediately. Unfortunately, the timing of this urgent surgery does not allow me to start touring in early October because of the required period of hospitalization and recuperation. I must remain optimistic that all will turn out well".In September 2011, Emerson began working with the renowned conductor Terje Mikkelsen, along with the Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla and The Munich Radio Orchestra on new orchestral renditions of ELP classics and their new compositions. In recent years, several notable classic music composers, conductors and musicians have been performing various orchestral versions of Emerson’s compositions, such as “Tarkus” and “Piano Concerto No.1”, around the world. As of 2012, the documentary film about Emerson "Emerson:Pictures of an Exhibitionist" is in post production. He occasionally sits in with jazz orchestras performing new arrangements of ELP pieces as well as standard jazz pieces.
Instrumentation and playing style 
On stage Emerson started out on Hammond organ, with a grand piano toward the back of the stage. By the end of his time with The Nice, the standard arrangement was two Hammond organs, a C-3 (only cosmetically different than a B-3) and an L-100, placed facing each other with the C-3 to the left from the audience point of view. The L-100 took plenty of abuse during the stage act and was usually reinforced, to the point where it weighed so much that, on at least one occasion, Emerson became trapped beneath it and had to be rescued by a roadie. At any given time Emerson is said  to have owned several L-100 models, in various stages of repair, to support his act. The C-3, in contrast, seems to have lasted for years.Although the Hammond L-100 with its shorter manuals is considered a "poor man's" Hammond, Emerson not only played much of the early Nice music on his L-100, but also made good use of some of its unique features which his bigger Hammond C-3 does not provide. The L-100 has a self-starting motor, which - if turned off and on in short intervals - renders the whole organ into a wailing howl while the note generator, which is tied to a synchronous motor, tries to recover to pitch. The L-100 also features a spring-loaded reverb tank, which produces bomb-like noises if shaken. Both effects can be heard in abundance on "Rondo 69". On "Ars Longa Vita Brevis" Emerson uses the reverb tank as a musical instrument, tapping the internal spring against the tank bottom in an effort to create a chromatic scale of "boings".With ELP, Emerson added the Moog synthesiser behind the C-3 with the keyboard and ribbon controller stacked on the top of the organ. The ribbon controller allowed Emerson to vary pitch, volume or timbre of the output from the Moog by moving his finger up and down the length of a touch-sensitive strip. It also could be used as a phallic symbol, which quickly became a feature of the act. When the Minimoog entered the act it was placed where needed, such as on top of the grand piano. The same location was also used for an electric Clavinet keyboard, used almost exclusively for the encore piece "Nut Rocker".During the Brain Salad Surgery tour of 1974 (one show of which was documented on the 3-LP set, Welcome Back My Friends, to the Show That Never Ends), Emerson's keyboard setup included the Hammond C-3 organ, run through multiple Leslie speakers driven by HiWatt guitar amplifiers, the Moog 3C modular synthesiser (modified by addition of various modules and an oscilloscope) with ribbon controller, a Steinway concert grand piano with a Moog Minimoog synthesiser on top of it (used for the steel drum part on Karn Evil 9, 2nd Impression), an upright acoustic-electric piano that was used for honky-tonk piano sounds, a Hohner Clavinet and another Moog Minimoog synthesiser. Emerson also used a prototype polyphonic synthesiser produced by Moog, which was the test bed for the Moog Polymoog polyphonic synthesiser. The original synthesiser setup as envisioned by Moog was called the Constellation, and consisted of three instruments - the polyphonic synthesiser, called the Apollo, a monophonic lead synthesizer called the Lyra, and a bass-pedal synthesiser, called the Taurus. Moog eventually produced the Moog Taurus bass pedal synthesiser as a separate instrument, as well as the Polymoog Synthesiser and Polymoog Keyboard. The Apollo polyphonic synthesiser is currently at a keyboard museum in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Emerson still owns the Lyra synthesiser.Occasionally Emerson used a pipe organ, when available. In particular, at the Newcastle City Hall he used the Harrison & Harrison pipe organ for the introductory section of Pictures at an Exhibition. The organ is located at the rear above the stage, at the top of a series of steps where choirs can stand. The end of the introductory passage is followed by a drum roll, covering the time while Emerson descended the steps. While all went well for the recording used to produce the album, the debut tour performance at the same venue ground to a halt as the power failed, just as Emerson arrived at the Hammond organ to open the next part of the piece. After a lengthy delay the performance continued with only the Hammond L-100 functioning.Emerson also used the organ at the Royal Festival Hall for "The Three Fates" from the eponymous debut album by the group. He also used another pipe organ for "The Only Way (Hymn)" from Tarkus. Emerson used the Royal Festival Hall pipe organ again in October 2002 for the introductory quotation from Dvorak's 9th Symphony (From The New World), before running back to the stage and performing "America (2nd Amendment)".Amplifiers and speakers behind Emerson became more elaborate, including a Leslie unit. There was also a board attached to the front of the stack, intended as a target for his knife throwing. He was given his trademark knife, an authentic Nazi dagger, by Lemmy, who was a roadie for The Nice in his earlier days.    During the Brain Salad Surgery tour, at the end of the show, a sequencer in the Moog Modular synthesiser was set running at an increasing rate, with the Moog Synthesiser pivoting to face the audience while a large pair of silver bat wings was deployed at the back of the synthesiser.As the technology of electronic keyboard instruments became more sophisticated, Emerson was quick to adopt new instruments, such as the Yamaha GX1 polyphonic synthesiser, one of which can be seen on the video promoting "Fanfare for the Common Man". Emerson was reported to have spent $50,000 to buy the Yamaha GX-1 synthesiser at the time of the Works Volume 1 album. Emerson later bought a 2nd GX-1 from John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, to use to repair his GX-1, which was damaged by a tractor crash into Emerson's home studio. At the time that Emerson left England in the early 1990s to move to Santa Monica, California, he sold the majority of his keyboard equipment, though not the modular Moog. The original Yamaha GX-1 was bought by Hans Zimmer of movie soundtrack fame, while the John Paul Jones GX-1 was bought by a collector in Italy.In 1978, Emerson became the official endorser of the world's first fully polyphonic synthesisers, the Korg PS-3300 and PS-3100. He started recording with them around this time too and the Korg PS-3300 was heavily used on the ELP album Love Beach. He carried on using it into the 1980s, the instrument dominating the 1981 film soundtrack for Nighthawks which starred Sylvester Stallone.He would sometimes reach into the interior and hit, pluck or strum the strings with his hand. The introduction to "Take a Pebble" included chords and arpeggios played by pressing down on keys, to raise the dampers from the strings, and playing the strings inside the piano as one might play the autoharp. In the live performance of "Hang On to A Dream" with the Nice, recorded for the post-breakup album Elegy, he performed a cadenza of sorts hitting the piano strings with a small hammer, followed by a lengthy wind-down, returning to the song in which he alternated keyboard arpeggios with blows directly on the bass strings.
Discography
Solo

Inferno - soundtrack (1980)
Nighthawks - soundtrack (1981)
Honky (1982)
Best Revenge - soundtrack (1985)
Murder Rock - soundtrack (1986)
The Emerson Collection (1986)
Harmageddon/China Free Fall (1987)
The Christmas Album (1988)
Changing States (aka Cream of Emerson Soup) (1995)
Emerson Plays Emerson (2002)
La Chiesa - soundtrack (2002)
Godzilla: Final Wars - soundtrack (2004)
At the Movies (2005)
Hammer It Out (anthology) (2005)
Off the Shelf (2006)
Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla (2008)
"Moscow" - live album CD & DVD (2010)


As part of a groupFor Emerson's work with The Nice, see The Nice Discography. For Emerson's work with Emerson, Lake & Palmer, see Emerson, Lake & Palmer discography. For Emerson's work with Emerson, Lake & Powell, see Emerson, Lake & Powell Discography. For Emerson's work with 3, see 3 Discography.Emerson also appeared with the short-lived group Aliens of Extraordinary Ability with Stuart Smith, Richie Onori, Marvin Sperling and Robbie Wykoff. 
Partial list of pieces based on other composers' worksNote that lack of credit does not imply plagiarism. It is certain that, where required, royalties were paid to composers or their estates. Permission to use pieces was sometimes denied by the composer's family or estate, as for instance with Gustav Holst's Mars, the Bringer of War. Aaron Copland was said to be somewhat puzzled by Emerson's take on Fanfare For the Common Man, but approved its use. Alberto Ginastera, on the other hand, was thrilled by Emerson's electronic realization of his first piano concerto, the fourth movement of which appeared on their album Brain Salad Surgery under the title "Toccata," and declared that he wished he could have done it in that fashion.
With the Nice

"America, 2nd Amendment", from West Side Storys "America", by Leonard Bernstein, credited, quoting Antonín Dvořák's symphony No. 9, From the New World, uncredited.
"Rondo", derived from Dave Brubeck's "Blue Rondo à la Turk", uncredited, quoting Bach, Italian Concerto third movement, uncredited.
"Diary of an Empty Day", from Symphonie Espagnole by Édouard Lalo, credited.
"Azrael Revisited", quoting Sergei Rachmaninoff's Prelude in C-sharp minor, credited, and Lennie Tristano's Turkish Mambo, uncredited.
"Ars Longa Vita Brevis" - Bach, the third Brandenburg Concerto, Allegro, credited.
"Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite" - Sibelius, credited.
"Pathetique", Symphony No. 6 by Tchaikovsky, credited.
"Hang on to a Dream", from "How Can We Hang On To A Dream?" by Tim Hardin, credited, quoting (during a live recording) "Summertime", from Porgy and Bess by George Gershwin, uncredited.
"She Belongs to Me", by Bob Dylan, credited, quoting Bach, uncredited, and fragments of the theme from The Magnificent Seven, by Elmer Bernstein, uncredited.
"Country Pie", by Bob Dylan, credited, lyrics partly set to Bach, the sixth Brandenburg Concerto, credited.


With ELP

"The Barbarian", based on Allegro barbaro, Sz. 49, BB 63 by Béla Bartók, uncredited on US release of Emerson Lake & Palmer (credited on the British Manticore re-pressing of the original LP, on the back cover of the LP jacket).
"Knife Edge", based on Sinfonietta by Leoš Janáček, uncredited on US release (credited on the British Manticore re-pressing of the original LP, on the back cover of the LP jacket); middle section based on French Suites by J.S. Bach, uncredited.
"The Only Way (Hymn)", incorporating (in the song's introduction and bridge) J.S. Bach's Toccata in F and Prelude VI, credited on Tarkus.
"Are You Ready Eddy?", based on the tune of Bobby Troup's song "The Girl Can't Help It" and including a quote from the Assembly bugle call, both uncredited (on Tarkus).
Pictures at an Exhibition, by Modest Mussorgsky, credited.
"Blues Variation" from Pictures at an Exhibition also contains an uncredited quote of the 'head' of Bill Evans' minor blues piece "Interplay", during Keith Emerson's Hammond Organ solo.
"Nutrocker", adapted by Kim Fowley (credited) from Tchaikovsky's "March of the Wooden Soldiers" (uncredited).
"Hoedown", from Rodeo by Aaron Copland, credited, quoting "Shortenin' Bread" and "Turkey in the Straw"", both traditional.
"Abaddon's Bolero", quoting "The Girl I Left Behind", traditional.
"Jerusalem", by C. Hubert H. Parry, credited.
"Toccata", from a piano concerto by Alberto Ginastera, endorsed by the composer, credited.
"Karn Evil 9, 2nd Impression", quoting "St. Thomas", a Caribbean melody sometimes attributed to Sonny Rollins, uncredited.
"Fanfare for the Common Man", by Aaron Copland, credited.
Carmina Burana, by Carl Orff, quoted in an extended solo in live recordings from Poland.
With Emerson, Lake & Powell, the main theme to "Touch & Go" is identical to the English folk song "Lovely Joan", better known as the counterpoint tune in Ralph Vaughan Williams Fantasia on Greensleeves Not credited. 
"Romeo & Juliet" from Romeo and Juliet suite by Sergei Prokofiev, credited.
"Love at First Sight" intro, 12 Etudes Op.10 (a son ami Franz Liszst) - No.1 in C major, allegro, by Frederic Chopin, uncredited.


With Billy Sherwood

"In The Flesh" (and Steve Porcaro + Vinnie Colaiuta, on Back Against The Wall) (2005)
"Black Dog" (and Alan White, on Led box The ultimate Led Zeppelin tribute) (2008)


Contemporary usageThe surreal comedy series, Big Train, featured Emerson portrayed by Kevin Eldon, as a Roman slave fighting his enemies with progressive rock. 
See also

List of Hammond organ players
List of Moog synthesizer players


References 

Forrester, George, Martyn Hanson and Frank Askew. Emerson, Lake & Palmer, The Show That Never Ends, A Musical Biography. (2001) Helter Skelter Publishing ISBN 1-900924-17-X.
Keith Emerson, Pictures of an Exhibitionist. (2004) ISBN 1-84454-053-7


External links 

 
 
 
Official ELP website

 
  
 
 
DEFAULTSORT











 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Stanley Fish
Stanley Eugene Fish (born April 19, 1938 in Providence, Rhode Island ) is an American literary theorist, legal scholar, academic, and public intellectual. He is often associated with postmodernism, at times to his irritation, as he describes himself as an anti-foundationalist. 
He is the Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and a professor of law at Florida International University, in Miami, as well as Dean Emeritus of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and the author of 12 books. Fish has also taught at the Cardozo School of Law, University of California, Berkeley, Johns Hopkins University, The University of Pennsylvania, Yale Law, Columbia University, The John Marshall Law School, and Duke University.
Academic careerFish earned a B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1959, and an M.A. from Yale University in 1960.  He completed his Ph.D. in 1962, also at Yale University. He taught English at the University of California at Berkeley and Johns Hopkins University before becoming Arts and Sciences Professor of English and Professor of Law at Duke University from 1986 to 1998. From 1999 to 2004 he was Dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago, as well as serving as Distinguished Visiting Professor at The John Marshall Law School from 2000 until 2002.   He also held joint appointments in the Departments of Political Science and Criminal Justice, and was the chairman of the Religious Studies Committee.  During his tenure there, he recruited professors well respected in the academic community and garnered a lot of attention for the College.  After resigning as dean in a high-level dispute with the state of Illinois over funding UIC,  Fish spent a year teaching in the Department of English. The Institute for the Humanities at UIC named a lecture series in his honor, which is still ongoing.  In June 2005, he accepted the position of Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and Law at Florida International University, teaching in the FIU College of Law. In November 2010 he joined the Board of Visitors of Ralston College, a start-up institution in Savannah, Georgia.  He has also been a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Science since 1985 . 
MiltonFish started his career as a medievalist. His first book, published by Yale University Press in 1965, was on the late-medieval/early-Renaissance poet John Skelton. Fish reveals in his partly biographical essay, "Milton, Thou Shouldst be Living at this Hour" (published in There's No Such Thing as Free Speech . . . And It's a Good Thing, Too), that he came to Milton by accident. In 1963 — the same year that Fish started as an assistant professor at the University of California, Berkeley — the resident Miltonist, Constantinos A. Patrides, received a grant. The chair of the department asked Fish to teach the Milton course, notwithstanding the fact that the young professor "had never — either as an undergraduate or in graduate school — taken a Milton course" (269). The eventual result of that course was Surprised by Sin: The Reader in Paradise Lost (1967; rpt. 1997).  Fish's 2001 book, How Milton Works, reflects five decades' worth of his scholarship on Milton.
Interpretive communities 
As a prominent and respected literary theorist, Fish is best known for his analysis of interpretive communities — an offshoot of reader-response criticism. Fish's work in this field examines how the interpretation of a text is dependent upon each reader's own subjective experience in one or more communities, each of which is defined as a 'community' by a distinct epistemology. For Fish, a large part of what renders a reader’s subjective experience valuable — that is, why it may be considered “constrained” as opposed to an uncontrolled and idiosyncratic assertion of the self — comes from a concept native to the field of linguistics called linguistic competence. In Fish’s source the term is explained as “the idea that it is possible to characterize a linguistic system that every speaker shares.”  In the context of literary criticism, Fish uses this concept to argue that a reader’s approach to a text is not completely subjective, and that an internalized understanding of language shared by the native speakers of that given language makes possible the creation of normative boundaries for one’s experience with language.
Fish and university politicsIn addition to his work in literary criticism, Fish has also written extensively on the politics of the university, having taken positions supporting campus speech codes and criticizing political statements by universities or faculty bodies on matters outside their professional areas of expertise.Fish argued in January 2008 on his New York Times-syndicated blog that the humanities are of no instrumental value, but have only intrinsic worth. Fish explains, "To the question 'of what use are the humanities?', the only honest answer is none whatsoever. And it is an answer that brings honor to its subject. Justification, after all, confers value on an activity from a perspective outside its performance. An activity that cannot be justified is an activity that refuses to regard itself as instrumental to some larger good. The humanities are their own good. There is nothing more to say, and anything that is said diminishes the object of its supposed praise." Fish has lectured across the country at many universities and colleges including Florida Atlantic University, Brown University, the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard University, University of Toronto, Columbia University, the University of Vermont, the University of Georgia, the University of Louisville, the University of Kentucky, Bates College,the University of Central Florida, the University of West Florida, and the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
Fish as university politicianAs chair of the Duke English department from 1986 to 1992, Fish attracted attention and controversy. Fish, according to Lingua Franca, used "shameless—and in academe unheard-of—entrepreneurial gusto" to take "a respectable but staid Southern English department and transform it into the professional powerhouse of the day," in part through the payment of lavish salaries. His time at Duke saw comparatively quite light undergraduate and graduate coursework requirements, matched by heavy graduate teaching requirements. This permitted professors to reduce their own teaching. In April 1992, near the end of Fish's time as department chair, an external review committee considered evidence that the English curriculum had become "a hodgepodge of uncoordinated offerings," lacking in "broad foundational courses" or faculty planning. The department's dissipating prominence in the 1990s was featured on the front page of the New York Times. Within the first years following Fish's departure as chair, many of his most prominent hires left, including Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick (citing anti-intellectualism and homophobia), Michael Moon, and Jonathan Goldberg. By 1999, Fish's wife, Americanist Jane Tompkins, had "practically quit teaching" at Duke and "worked as a cook at a local health food restaurant." 
Criticisms of his workAs a frequent contributor to the New York Times  and the Wall Street Journal editorial page, Fish has been the target of wide-ranging criticism.Writing in Slate Magazine, Judith Shulevitz reported that not only does Fish openly proclaim himself "unprincipled" but also rejects wholesale the concepts of "fairness, impartiality, reasonableness." To Fish, "ideas have no consequences." For taking this stance, Shulevitz characterizes Fish as "not the unprincipled relativist he's accused of being. He's something worse. He's a fatalist." Likewise, among academics, Fish has endured vigorous criticism.  The conservative R. V. Young writes,  Terry Eagleton, a prominent British Marxist,  excoriates Fish's "discreditable epistemology" as "sinister." According to Eagleton, "Like almost all diatribes against universalism, Fish's critique of universalism has its own rigid universals: the priority at all times and places of sectoral interests, the permanence of conflict, the a priori status of belief systems, the rhetorical character of truth, the fact that all apparent openness is secretly closure, and the like." Hence, it is inherently self-defeating. Of Fish's attempt to co-opt the critiques leveled against him, Eagleton responds, "The felicitous upshot is that nobody can ever criticise Fish, since if their criticisms are intelligible to him, they belong to his cultural game and are thus not really criticisms at all; and if they are not intelligible, they belong to some other set of conventions entirely and are therefore irrelevant." In her essay "Sophistry about Conventions," philosopher Martha Nussbaum argues that Stanley Fish's theoretical views are based on "extreme relativism and even radical subjectivism."  Discounting his work as nothing more than sophistry, Nussbaum claims that Fish "relies on the regulative principle of non-contradiction in order to adjudicate between competing principles," thereby relying on normative standards of argumentation even as he argues against them.  Offering an alternative, Nussbaum cites John Rawls's work in A Theory of Justice to highlight "an example of a rational argument; it can be said to yield, in a perfectly recognizable sense, ethical truth."  Nussbaum appropriates Rawls's critique of the insufficiencies of Utilitarianism, showing that a rational person will consistently prefer a system of justice that acknowledges boundaries between separate persons rather than relying on the aggregation of the sum total of desires. "This," she claims, "is all together different from rhetorical manipulation." Camille Paglia, author of Sexual Personae and public intellectual, denounced Fish as a "totalitarian Tinkerbell," charging him with hypocrisy for lecturing about multiculturalism from the perspective of a tenured professor at the homogeneous and sheltered ivory tower of Duke. David Hirsch, a prominent critic of post-structuralist influences on hermeneutics, censured Fish for "lapses in logical rigor" and "carelessness toward rhetorical precision." In an examination of Fish's arguments, Hirsch attempts to demonstrate that "not only was a restoration of New Critical methods unnecessary, but that Fish himself had not managed to rid himself of the shackles of New Critical theory."  Hirsch compares Fish's work to Penelope's loom in the Odyssey, stating, "what one critic weaves by day, another unweaves by night."  "Nor," he writes, "does this weaving and unweaving constitute a dialectic, since no forward movement takes place."  Ultimately, Hirsch sees Fish as left to "wander in his own Elysian fields, hopelessly alienated from art, from truth, and from humanity." 
Awards
Fish received the PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay in 1994 for There's No Such Thing As Free Speech, and it's a Good Thing, Too
See also

Formalism
New Criticism


Notes and references 
Bibliography
Primary works by Stanley Fish

John Skelton's Poetry.  New Haven, CT: Yale UP, 1965.
Surprised by Sin: The Reader in Paradise Lost.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1967.  ISBN 0-674-85747-X (10).  ISBN 978-0-674-85747-6 (13).
Self-Consuming Artifacts: The Experience of Seventeenth-Century Literature.  Berkeley, CA: U of California P, 1972.
"Interpreting the Variorum."  Critical Inquiry (1976).
"Why We Can't All Just Get Along."  First Things (1996).
The Living Temple: George Herbert and Catechizing.  Berkeley, CA: U of California P, 1978.
Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1980.  ISBN 0-674-46726-4 (10). ISBN 978-0-674-46726-2 (13).
Doing What Comes Naturally: Change, Rhetoric, and the Practice of Theory in Literary and Legal Studies.  Durham, NC: Duke UP, 1989.
Professional Correctness: Literary Studies and Political Change.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard U P, 1999.
The Trouble with Principle.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1999.
How Milton Works.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 2001.
Save The World on Your Own Time Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
The Fugitive in Flight: Faith, Liberalism, and Law in a Classic TV Show. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010.
How to Write a Sentence: And How to Read One. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers, 2011.


Collections of works by Stanley Fish

There's No Such Thing As Free Speech, and it's a Good Thing, Too.  New York: Oxford UP, 1994.
The title essay and an additional essay, "Jerry Falwell's Mother," focus on free speech issues.  In the latter piece, Fish argues that, if one has some answer in mind to the question "what is free speech good for?" along the lines of "in the free and open clash of viewpoints the truth can more readily be known," then it makes no sense to defend deliberate malicious libel (such as that which was at issue in the U.S. Supreme Court case of Hustler Magazine v. Falwell) in the name of "free speech."
The Stanley Fish Reader.  Ed. H. Aram Veeser.  London: Blackwell Publishers, 1999.


Secondary criticism about Stanley Fish

Olson, Gary A.  Justifying Belief: Stanley Fish and the Work of Rhetoric.  Albany: SUNY P, 2002.
Postmodern Sophistry: Stanley Fish and the Critical Enterprise.  Ed. Gary Olson and Lynn Worsham.  Albany, NY: SUNY P, 2004.
Owen, J. Judd. Religion and the Demise of Liberal Rationalism.  Chapters 6–8 and "Appendix: A Reply to Stanley Fish." University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Perez-Firmat, Gustavo: “Interpretive Assumptions and Interpreted Texts:  On a Poem by Stanley Fish,” Essays in Literature, 11 (1984), 145–52.
Lang, Chris "The Reader-Response Theory of Stanley Fish"[5]
Landa, José Ángel García "Stanley E. Fish's Speech Acts"[6]

                                                                                          
External links 

Smart People Podcast interview with Stanley Fish
Interview with Stanley Fish published in The minnesota review March 3, 2000.  Accessed December 23, 2006.
"Leading Professor Stanley Fish to Join FIU Law Faculty."  Press release.  Florida International University.  June 29, 2005.
Stanley Fish article published in the Johns Hopkins University Guide to Literary Theory & Criticism.
Stanley Fish.  Florida International University Law School faculty biography.
Stanley Fish's blog at The New York Times Editorial section.
Stanley Fish on Deconstruction.  Radio interview with program host, Hugh LaFollette.  WETS-FM.  University of San Francisco.  n.d.  (Audio link.)
 

WorldCat Identities page for Stanley Eugene Fish

 
DEFAULTSORT













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Lennox Lewis
 Lennox Claudius Lewis, CM, CBE (born 2 September 1965) is a retired boxer and the most recent undisputed world heavyweight champion. He holds dual British and Canadian citizenship. As an amateur he won gold representing Canada at the 1988 Olympic Games after defeating future heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe in the final.Lewis turned professional in 1989, winning his first 21 fights. In 1992 he knocked out Donovan Ruddock to take over the number one position in the World Boxing Council (WBC) rankings and eventually be declared WBC heavyweight champion in 1993. Lewis lost the title to Oliver McCall in 1994 but defeated McCall in a rematch to win the vacant WBC title in 1997. Lewis went on to defend the title four times, becoming the Lineal Champion after beating Shannon Briggs by KO in 1998. He became undisputed champion after defeating Evander Holyfield in November 1999. After defeating Mike Tyson by KO in 2002 and stopping Vitali Klitschko in 2003, Lennox Lewis retired from boxing in 2004.Throughout his professional career, Lewis suffered two losses, both of which he avenged in rematches, both by knockout. Lewis won the heavyweight championship three times and was the fifth man to reclaim the lineal championship.Lewis is   tall and has an   reach. During his boxing prime, he weighed about  . Lewis often referred to himself as "the pugilist specialist."
Early lifeLewis was born on 2 September, 1965, in West Ham, London, England to Jamaican-born parents.  At birth he weighed  , and was given the name Lennox by the doctor, who said he looked like a Lennox.  Lewis moved to Kitchener, Ontario, Canada in 1977 at the age of 12. He attended Cameron Heights Collegiate Institute for high school, where he excelled in Canadian football, soccer and basketball.   
Amateur careerLewis eventually decided that his favorite sport was boxing. He became a dominant amateur boxer and won the world amateur junior title in 1983.   At the age of 18, Lewis represented Canada as a super heavyweight at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. He advanced to the quarter-finals, where he lost a decision to American Tyrell Biggs, the eventual gold medalist.Lewis chose not to turn professional after the Olympics, and instead fought four more years as an amateur, hoping for a second chance to win a gold medal. After winning several more amateur titles during those years, he travelled to Seoul, South Korea for the 1988 Summer Olympics and achieved his goal. In the gold medal match, Lewis defeated future world champion Riddick Bowe by a second round referee stopped contest (RSC).
Professional boxing careerHaving achieved that goal, Lewis declared himself a professional boxer and moved back to his native England. He claimed he'd always considered himself British,      but many British fans regard him as "a Canadian at heart and a Briton for convenience," as he had trained only in Canada and the United States and already lived half his life in North America.   He signed with the boxing promoter Frank Maloney and the early part of his pro career was filled with knockouts of journeymen. After he signed with American promoter Main Events  he captured the European heavyweight title late in 1990 against Frenchman Jean Maurice Chanet. In his next fight in March 1991, Lewis won the British title against the undefeated world ranked Gary Mason, then won the Commonwealth title in April 1992 against Derek Williams.By this time, Lewis was a consensus top-five heavyweight in the world. During this period Lewis defeated former WBA heavyweight champion Mike Weaver, 1984 Olympic Gold medalist Tyrell Biggs, former world cruiserweight title holders Glenn McCrory and Osvaldo Ocasio, and journeymen Levi Billups and Mike Dixon.
WBC championOn 31 October 1992, Lewis knocked out Canadian Donovan "Razor" Ruddock in two rounds for the number one contender's position in the WBC world rankings. At the time it was Lewis' most impressive win, and established him as one of the world's best heavyweights. Sportscaster Larry Merchant declared following the win "We have a great new heavyweight."The win over Ruddock made Lewis the number one contender for Riddick Bowe's heavyweight championship. Bowe refused to face Lewis, and held a press conference to dump the title in a trash can and relinquish it. On 14 December 1992, the WBC declared Lewis its champion, making him the first world heavyweight titleholder from Britain in the 20th century.Lewis successfully defended the belt three times, defeating Tony Tucker, who was decked (in the third and ninth rounds) for the first time in his career, and he followed this up with knockout victories over Phil Jackson and Frank Bruno. The Lennox Lewis vs. Frank Bruno fight was the first time that two British-born boxers had fought for a version of the world heavyweight title. 
Loss to McCallLewis lost his WBC title to Oliver McCall on 24 September 1994 in a huge upset at the Wembley Arena in London. In the second round, McCall connected with a powerful right hook, putting Lewis down on his back. He was up at the count of six, but stumbled forward into the referee in a daze. Referee Jose Guadalupe Garcia felt Lewis was unable to continue and ended the fight, giving McCall the win by technical knockout. Lewis and others argued that the stoppage was premature and that a champion should be given the benefit of the doubt.    They also contended that Garcia, a Mexican referee working for the Mexican-based WBC, had been persuaded by promoter Don King to end the fight early if the opportunity arose, in order to bring back the heavyweight title to his promotional stable. Evans, Gavin (2005-09-19). Mama's Boy: Lennox Lewis and the Heavyweight Crown. Highdown Publishing. ISBN 9781905156092. After the fight, Lewis decided he needed a new trainer to replace Pepe Correa, who had become increasingly difficult to work with. Correa would subsequently denounce Lewis in public after being fired. Renowned trainer Emanuel Steward, who had been McCall's trainer during their fight, was one of Lewis' first choices for the task. Even before the fight with McCall, Steward had seen much potential in Lewis and immediately expressed a desire to work with him. He set about correcting several of Lewis' technical flaws over the course of the next few fights, which included maintaining a more balanced stance, less reliance on the right hand, and a particular focus on using a strong, authoritative jab; the latter of which would become a hallmark of Lewis' style throughout his career. Their partnership would last until Lewis' retirement, with both having mutual praise and respect for each other to this day. 
Regaining the WBC titleIn his first comeback fight Lewis was given a chance to fight for the mandatory challenger position within the WBC and won it by knocking out American contender Lionel Butler. However, at the behest of promoter Don King  the WBC chose to bypass him and give Mike Tyson the first shot at the title that had recently been won by fellow Briton Frank Bruno against Oliver McCall. Bruno had previously lost to both Lewis and Tyson.While Lewis had the No. 1 contender's slot in the WBC rankings he knocked out Australian Justin Fortune, then defeated former WBO Champion Tommy Morrison in October 1995, and Olympic gold medallist and former WBO champion Ray Mercer by a close majority decision in May 1996. Lewis successfully sued to try to force Tyson to make a mandatory defense of the WBC title against him or force Tyson to give up the title, winning a four million dollar settlement from promoter Don King. Rather than fight Lewis, Tyson relinquished the WBC belt to fight Evander Holyfield, and the title was declared vacant. This set up a rematch between Lewis and McCall, who squared off on 7 February 1997 in Las Vegas for the WBC title. In one of the strangest fights in boxing history, McCall (having lost the first three rounds) refused to box in the fourth and fifth rounds, then began crying in the ring, forcing the referee to stop the fight and award Lewis the victory and the title.
As newly re-crowned WBC champion, Lewis successfully defended the title during 1997 against fellow Briton and former WBO world champion Henry Akinwande, who was disqualified after five rounds for excessive clinching. Lewis then met Poland's Andrew Golota, whom he knocked out in the first round. During 1998, Lewis again retained the WBC world title when he knocked out lineal champion Shannon Briggs in five rounds (Briggs had recently outpointed George Foreman in a controversial fight, to win the lineal title) and beat formerly-undefeated European champion Željko Mavrović from Croatia in a 12-round unanimous decision. Lewis stated in 2006 that his fight with Mavrovic was the most awkward win of his career. 
Lewis vs. Holyfield
On 13 March 1999, Lewis faced WBA and IBF title holder Evander Holyfield in New York City in what was supposed to be a heavyweight unification bout. Lewis fought a brilliant tactical fight, keeping Holyfield off balance with a long jab and peppering him with combinations almost at will. Although most observers believed Lewis had clearly won the fight, the bout was declared a draw, to much controversy. The raw statistics of the fight suggested the bout belonged to Lewis, who landed 348 punches compared to Holyfield's 130. Lewis also out-jabbed Holyfield 137 to 52.  Judge Eugenia Williams, who scored the fight in Holyfield's favour, said she saw Lewis land fewer punches than Holyfield. 
Lewis vs. Holyfield II
The sanctioning bodies ordered a rematch.    Eight months later in Las Vegas (13 November 1999), the two men fought again in a more open and entertaining contest than the original fight, with the two boxers having some heavy exchanges from rounds 6 to 9. The punch stats however still clearly favoured Lewis who landed 195 punches to Evander Holyfield's 137 punches, although interestingly Lewis landed 119 power shots and 76 jabs, showing a definite shift in his tactics from the first fight when he focused more on the jab. This time around the 3 Judges did score the fight unanimously (115–113, 116–112 & 117–111) all in favour of Lewis who became undisputed heavyweight champion of the World.In 1999, Lewis was given one of the most prestigious sports awards in Britain, being voted the BBC Sports Personality of the Year.
Reign as Undisputed ChampionAfter Lewis defeated Holyfield the WBA ordered Lewis to defend the title against John Ruiz of Puerto Rico, then an obscure Don King fighter who had been made the WBA's #1-ranked contender. The WBA gave permission for Lewis to fight his WBC mandatory Michael Grant first if he would fight Ruiz next, which Lewis agreed to. Opposed to this, Ruiz's promoter challenged this decision in court on the basis of a clause in the Lewis-Holyfield rematch contract that said Lewis's first bout as undisputed champion would be against the WBA's number one contender. Lewis was therefore to be stripped of his WBA belt if he fought Grant first. It was because of this that the WBA instated its "Super Champion" title, giving unified titleholders who also hold a WBA belt more time to defend against mandatory challengers. Lewis proceeded to fight the 6 ft 8 inch American Michael Grant who he considered the best contender available. He successfully defended his WBC, IBO & IBF titles against Grant with a second round knockout victory in Madison Square Garden in April 2000.Later that same year Lewis knocked out South African Francois Botha in two rounds in London, before winning a 12-round decision against New Zealander and IBF mandatory opponent, David Tua in Las Vegas.
Lewis vs. Rahman
On 21 April 2001, Lewis was knocked out by 15-to-1 underdog Hasim Rahman in a bout in South Africa. Prior to the bout, Lewis had a role in the film Ocean's Eleven in which he "boxed" against Wladimir Klitschko.
Lewis vs. Rahman II
Lewis immediately sought a rematch with the new champion; however, Rahman, now being promoted by Don King, tried to secure another opponent for his inaugural title defence. Lewis took Rahman to court to honour the rematch clause in their contract. Rahman was ordered to honour the clause and give Lewis a rematch in his first title defence. While promoting the rematch with Rahman on ESPN's Up Close, the fighters got into a brawl    similar to the one between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier in front of Howard Cosell on Wide World of Sports. Many  felt the brawl was staged to promote the fight, so the reality of the episode is still a matter of debate. Lewis regained the title on 17 November by outclassing and then knocking out Hasim Rahman in the fourth round of their rematch.
Lewis vs. Tyson 

On 8 June 2002, Lewis defended his title against Mike Tyson. A fight many had hoped would be a classic turned out to be one-sided as Lennox used his jab and superior reach to score a dominant knockout victory over "Iron Mike." By the end of the seventh round Tyson was tired and sluggish, his face swollen and his eyes cut. He was knocked out in the eighth by a right hook from Lewis. After the fight was over, George Foreman declared "He [Lewis] is, no doubt, the best heavyweight of all time. What he's done clearly puts him on top of the heap."  
This fight was the highest-grossing event in pay-per-view history, generating $106.9 million from 1.95 million buys in the U.S., until it was surpassed by De La Hoya-Mayweather in 2007.   Ticket sales were slow because they were priced as high as $2,400, but a crowd of 15,327 turned up to see Memphis, Tennessee's biggest-ever sporting event. Tyson also had to pay Lewis $335,000 out of his purse for biting him at the news conference to announce the fight, which was originally scheduled for 6 April 2002 in Las Vegas. Las Vegas, however, rejected the fight because of Tyson's licensing problems and several other states refused Tyson a license before Memphis finally bid $12 million to land it.
Lewis vs. KlitschkoIn May 2003, Lewis sued boxing promoter Don King for $385 million, claiming that King used threats to have Tyson pull out of a rematch scheduled with Lewis then scheduled a fight with Kirk Johnson, but when Johnson suffered an injury in training, Lewis fought Vitali Klitschko, the WBC's #1 contender and former WBO champion. Lewis had planned to fight him in December, but since Klitschko had been on the undercard of the Johnson fight anyway, they agreed to square off on June 21. Lewis entered the ring at a career high 256½ pounds.    Lewis was dominated in the early rounds and was wobbled in round two by solid Klitschko punches. Lewis opened a cut above Klitschko's eye with a right cross in the third round and gave a better showing in the fourth round, and gaining the upper hand in fifth and sixth rounds. Before the start of round seven the doctor advised that the fight should be stopped because of a severe cut above Klitschko's left eye, awarding Lewis victory by TKO. Klitschko was leading 58–56 on all three judges' scorecards when the fight was stopped.Interviewed about the fight by HBO, doctor Paul Wallace explained his decision:
 
"When he raised his head up, his upper eyelid covered his field of vision. At that point I had no other option but to stop the fight. If he had to move his head to see me, there was no way he could defend his way against a punch."
 
Klitschko's face required sixty stitches.   Because Klitschko had fought so bravely against Lewis, boxing fans soon began calling for a rematch. The WBC agreed, and kept the Ukrainian as its No. 1 contender. Lewis initially was in favour of a rematch:
 
"I want the rematch, I enjoyed that fight. It was just a fight. We went at it. You have to play dollars and cents but I'm opting more for the rematch." 
 
Negotiations for the rematch followed but Lewis changed his mind   Instead, Klitschko fought and defeated Kirk Johnson on December 6 in WBC Eliminator, setting up a mandatory rematch with Lewis. Lewis announced his retirement shortly thereafter and vacated the title. Lewis stated when he had decided not to fight:
 "So, when it came time for me to see if I should fight Klitschko again, I thought – at my worst, at my worst! I beat Klitschko and look what I did to his face! I was at my worst – just think [what would’ve happened] if I’d trained just a little bit harder. I didn’t need to fight him again."  
Hanging up the gloves
Lewis announced his retirement in February 2004 and decided to pursue other interests, including sports management and music promotion. Lewis said he would not return to the ring. At his retirement, Lewis's record was 41 wins, 2 losses and 1 draw, with 32 wins by knockout. Though it was rumoured in an article published by the Daily Mail on the February 24 that he would return to fight Klitschko once again, Lewis quickly shot down those rumours on his personal website. In 2008 Lewis commented on a possible match up with Riddick Bowe. "He waits until I am in retirement to call out my name," said Lewis. "I will come out of retirement to beat up that guy. I'll beat him up for free." Along with Gene Tunney and Rocky Marciano he is one of three world heavyweight champions to have retired with no unavenged defeats.
Outside boxing
In 2000, Lewis appeared on Reflection Eternal's debut album Train of Thought, giving a shout out on the track "Down for the Count."In 2002, Lewis was reportedly offered £5m by WWE chairman Vince McMahon to take up wrestling with WWE. His camp held discussions over a possible match with former WWE superstar Brock Lesnar in February 2003, at the No Way Out pay-per-view event.  He had borne the Union Flag for the British Bulldog before his match against Bret "The Hitman" Hart at SummerSlam in 1992.In 2003, Lewis made a brief cameo appearance in the Jennifer Lopez and LL Cool J video "All I Have".Lewis played in the World Series of Poker in both 2006 and 2007, and was knocked out without winning any money.Lewis appeared on NBC's Celebrity Apprentice in 2008. He came in fourth place (out of 14).Lewis has also done a public service announcement against domestic violence for Do Something. In 2008, Lewis was inducted into Canada's Sports Hall of Fame.  In 2009, in his first year of eligibility, Lewis was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame. On 8 May 2010, Lewis was let go by HBO as a commentator for Boxing After Dark.In 2011 he was awarded an honorary Doctorate from Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, Ontario.
Personal life
Upon retiring from boxing, Lewis moved to Miami Beach with his wife, Violet Chang, a former Miss Jamaica runner-up. They have four children. Lewis told AventuraUSA.com in 2007 that he is contemplating opening an "international boxing academy" and perhaps one day starting a record label, but he has yet to embark on either endeavour. Lewis supports the English football team West Ham United, the local team for the place of his birth.  Lewis has a villa at the Tryall Club in Montego Bay, Jamaica.Lewis is an avid amateur chess player, and funded an after-school chess program for disadvantaged youths, one of whom earned a university chess scholarship at Tennessee Tech. 
Amateur highlights


Record: 75–7 (58 KOs)   
1983 Junior World Super Heavyweight Champion
Represented Canada as a Super Heavyweight at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles. Results were:
Defeated Mohammad Youssuf (Pakistan) TKO 3
Lost to Tyrell Biggs (United States) points
1985 Silver Medalist at World Cup competition.
1986 Super Heavyweight Gold Medalist at the Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh, Scotland
1987 Super Heavyweight Silver Medalist at Pan American Games in Indianapolis. Lost to Jorge Luis Gonzalez of Cuba in the final.
1987 Won the North American Super Heavyweight championship competition, defeating Jorge Luis Gonzalez
Won the Super Heavyweight Gold medal for Canada at the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.
Defeated Chris Odera (Kenya) TKO 2
Defeated Ulli Kaden (East Germany) TKO 1
Defeated Janusz Zarenkiewicz (Poland) forfeit
Defeated Riddick Bowe (United States) TKO 2.


Professional boxing record 
| style="text-align:center;" colspan="8"|41 Wins (32 knockouts), 2 Losses, 1 Draw 
|-  style="text-align:center; margin:0.5em auto; font-size:95%; background:#e3e3e3;"
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Res.
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Record
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Opponent
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Type
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Rd., Time
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Date
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Location
|  style="border-style:none none solid solid; "|Notes
|- align=center
| Win||41–2–1||align=left|  Vitali Klitschko
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
|colspan=8| 
|- align=center
| Win||40–2–1||align=left|  Mike Tyson
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
|colspan=8| 
|- align=center
| Win||39–2–1||align=left|  Hasim Rahman
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Loss||38–2–1||align=left|  Hasim Rahman
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||38–1–1||align=left|  David Tua
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||37–1–1||align=left|  Francois Botha
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||36–1–1||align=left|  Michael Grant
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
|colspan=8| 
|- align=center
| Win||35–1–1||align=left|  Evander Holyfield
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
|style="background: #c5d2ea"|Draw||34–1–1||align=left|  Evander Holyfield
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||34–1||align=left|  Željko Mavrović
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||33–1||align=left|  Shannon Briggs
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||32–1||align=left|  Andrew Golota
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||31–1||align=left|  Henry Akinwande
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||30–1||align=left|  Oliver McCall
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||29–1||align=left|  Ray Mercer
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||28–1||align=left|  Tommy Morrison
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left| 
|- align=center
| Win||27–1||align=left|  Justin Fortune
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||26–1||align=left|  Lionel Butler
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Loss||25–1||align=left|  Oliver McCall
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||25–0||align=left|  Phil Jackson
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||24–0||align=left|  Frank Bruno
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||23–0||align=left|  Tony Tucker
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
|colspan=8| 
|- align=center
| Win||22–0||align=left|  Donovan Ruddock
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||21–0||align=left|  Mike Dixon
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||20–0||align=left|  Derek Williams
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||19–0||align=left|  Levi Billups
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||18–0||align=left|  Tyrell Biggs
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win ||17–0||align=left|  Glenn McCrory
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||16–0||align=left|  Mike Weaver
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||15–0||align=left|  Gary Mason
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||14–0||align=left|  Jean Chanet
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
|- align=center
| Win||13–0||align=left|  Mike Acey
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||12–0||align=left|  Ossie Ocasio
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||11–0||align=left|  Dan Murphy
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||10–0||align=left|  Jorgé Dascola
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||9–0|| align=left|  Michael Simuwelu
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||8–0|| align=left|  Calvin Jones
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||7–0||align=left|  Noel Quarless
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||6–0||align=left|  Greg Gorrell
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||5–0||align=left|  Melvin Epps
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||4–0||align=left|  Steve Garber
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||3–0||align=left|  Andrew Gerrard
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||2–0||align=left|  Bruce Johnson
| || || 
|align=left| 
|align=left|
|- align=center
| Win||1–0||align=left|  Al Malcolm
| || || 
|align=left| 
| 
 
Styles from birth

Lennox Lewis, CM (1988–1999)
Lennox Lewis, CM, MBE (1999–2002)
Lennox Lewis, CM, CBE (2002–present)


See also 

List of heavyweight boxing champions
List of WBC world champions
List of Canadian sports personalities
List of British heavyweight boxing champions
List of European Boxing Union heavyweight champions


References 
External links 

Official Site
BBC Sports-Lewis' career in photos
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
DEFAULTSORT



































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Tommy Cooper
 
 
 Thomas Frederick "Tommy" Cooper (19 March 1921 – 15 April 1984) was a British prop comedian and magician.Cooper was a member of The Magic Circle, and respected by traditional magicians. Famed for his red fez, his appearance was large and lumbering at   and more than   in weight. On 15 April 1984, Cooper collapsed and soon after died from a heart attack in front of millions of television viewers, midway through his act on the London Weekend Television variety show Live From Her Majesty's, transmitted live from Her Majesty's Theatre. His stage persona required that his act intentionally went wrong for comic purposes, leading to some initial uncertainty about whether this collapse was real.
BiographyBorn in Caerphilly, South Wales, at 19 Llwyn Onn Street, Trecenydd, Cooper was delivered by the woman who owned the house in which the family was lodging. His parents were Welsh-born army recruiting sergeant father Thomas H. (Tom) Cooper, and his English-born wife Gertrude (née Gertrude C. Wright) from Crediton, Devon.  Tommy Cooper exetermemories.co.uk  In light of the heavily polluted air and the offer of a job for his father, the family moved to Exeter, Devon, when Cooper was three and gained the West Country accent that was part of his act. Anniversary of Tommy Cooper's death BBC Wales News - 16 April 2004 The family lived in the back of Haven Banks, where Cooper attended Mount Radford School for Boys, and helped his parents run their ice cream van, which attended fairs on the weekend. At the age of eight an aunt bought Cooper a magic set and he spent hours perfecting the tricks. Magic ran in his family—his brother David (born 1930 )  opened a magic shop in the 1960s in Slough High Street (then Buckinghamshire now Berkshire) called D. & Z. Cooper's Magic Shop. 
World War IIAfter school, Cooper became a shipwright in Hythe, Hampshire, and in 1940 was called up as a trooper in the Royal Horse Guards regiment of the British Army in World War II. He served initially in Montgomery's Desert Rats in Egypt. Cooper became part of the NAAFI entertainment party and developed an act around his magic tricks interspersed with comedy. One evening in Cairo, during a sketch in which he was supposed to be in a costume which required a pith helmet, having forgotten the prop, Cooper reached out and borrowed the fez from a passing waiter which got huge laughs. Tommy Cooper: Just Like That! BBC News  It was from this incident that stemmed two of the attributes that were a hallmark of his later act: the ever-present fez hat and his aptitude for slapstick comedy.
Act developmentWhen he was demobbed after seven years of military service, Cooper took up show business on Christmas Eve, 1947—he would later add a popular monologue about his military experience as "Cooper the Trooper". Cooper worked in variety theatres around the country and at London's Windmill Theatre, where he performed 52 shows per week. Cooper had developed his conjuring skills and was a member of The Magic Circle, but there are various versions as to where he developed his act delivery of "failed" magic tricks: 

Performing to his shipbuilding colleagues when everything went wrong. Devastated, Cooper still noted that the failed tricks got laughs.
During his British Army career.
At a post-war audition, at which his tricks went wrong, but which the panel thoroughly enjoyed.

To keep the audience on their toes, Cooper threw in the occasional trick that worked when it was least expected.
Career 
In 1947 Cooper got his big break with Miff Ferrie, at that time trombonist in a band called The Jackdaws, who booked him to appear as the second spot comedian in a show starring sand dance act "Marqueeze and the Dance of the Seven Veils". Cooper then began a two-year period of arduous performing. It included a tour of Europe and a stint in pantomime, playing one of Cinderella's ugly sisters. The period culminated in a season long booking at the Windmill Theatre where he doubled up doing cabarets; one week performing in 52 shows. Ferrie would remain Cooper's sole agent for the next 37 years, until Cooper's death in 1984.Cooper rapidly became a top-liner in variety with his turn as the conjurer whose tricks never succeeded, but it was his television work which raised him to national prominence. After his debut on the BBC talent show New to You in March 1948, he soon started starring in his own shows, and was popular with audiences for four decades, most notably through his work with London Weekend Television from 1968 to 1972 and with Thames Television from 1973 to 1980. Thanks to his many television shows during the mid 70s, he was one of the biggest and most recognizable comedians in the world.Cooper was a heavy drinker and smoker, and experienced a decline in health during the late 1970s, suffering a heart attack in 1977 while in Rome, where he was performing a show. Three months later he was back on television in Night Out at the London Casino. By 1980, though, his drinking meant that Thames Television would not give him another starring series, and Cooper's Half Hour was his last. He did continue to guest on other television shows, however, and worked with Eric Sykes on two Thames productions in 1982:John Fisher writes in Cooper's biography, "Everyone agrees that he was mean. Quite simply he was acknowledged as the tightest man in show business, with a pathological dread of reaching into his pocket." One of Cooper's stunts was to pay the exact taxi fare and when leaving the cab to slip something into the taxi driver's pocket saying, "Have a drink on me." That something would turn out to be a tea bag. By the mid-1970s, alcohol had started to erode Cooper's professionalism and club owners complained that he turned up late or rushed through his show in five minutes. In addition, he suffered chronic indigestion, lumbago, sciatica, bronchitis and severe circulation problems in his legs. When Cooper realised the extent of his injuries he cut down on his drinking and the energy and confidence returned to his act and some of his later television performances were a revelation. However, he never stopped drinking and could be fallible: on an otherwise triumphant appearance with Parkinson he forgot to set the safety catch on the guillotine illusion into which he had cajoled Parkinson. Only a last-minute intervention by the floor manager saved Parkinson from serious injury or worse. 
Death on a live television showOn 15 April 1984, Cooper collapsed from a heart attack in front of millions of television viewers, midway through his act on the London Weekend Television variety show Live From Her Majesty's, transmitted live from Her Majesty's Theatre. An assistant had helped him put on a cloak for his sketch, while Jimmy Tarbuck, the host, was hiding behind the curtain waiting to pass him different props which he would then appear to pull from inside his gown.    The assistant smiled at him as he collapsed, believing that it was a joke.    Likewise, the audience laughed as he fell, until it became apparent he was seriously ill.  At this point the show's director, Alasdair MacMillan, cued the orchestra to play music for an unscripted commercial break (noticeable by several seconds of blank screen while LWT's master control contacted regional stations to start transmitting advertisements)  and Tarbuck's manager tried to pull Cooper back through the curtains. It was decided to continue with the show. Dustin Gee and Les Dennis were the act that had to follow Tommy Cooper, and other stars proceeded to present their acts in the limited space in front of the stage. For a long time, a rumour circulated that the size 13 feet from his 6' 4" frame protruded underneath the curtains. While the show continued, efforts were being made backstage to revive Cooper, not made easier by the darkness. It was not until a second commercial break that ambulancemen were able to move his body to Westminster Hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival. His death wasn't officially reported until the next morning, although the incident was the lead item on the news programme that followed the show.The video of Tommy Cooper suffering a heart attack on stage has been uploaded to numerous video sharing websites. YouTube was heavily criticised by the press when footage of the incident was posted on their website in May 2009.  On 28 December 2011, segments of the Live From Her Majesty's clip, including Cooper collapsing on stage, were screened on Channel 4 in the UK, on a programme titled "The Untold Tommy Cooper".Cooper was cremated at Mortlake Crematorium in London.  He was survived by his wife, Gwen (whom he called 'Dove'), and two children, Thomas and Vicky, and a two-year-old grandchild, Tam. Cooper's son Thomas, who was an actor in his own right, changed his name for stage to Thomas Henty (his mother's maiden name). Henty said in interviews that, though he loved his dad, he needed his own identity to make a career on stage, and told very few who his famed father was, to further his dramatic acting career. Eventually son Tom travelled on the road as manager to his father. He also acted as occasional stage manager to his father, and was backstage with his father on the night he died. But like his father, son Thomas was a heavy drinker, and he died in August 1988 at Charing Cross Hospital in Fulham, London, aged 32. He died of haematemesis, following complications caused by liver failure. Doctors had attempted to pump seventy pints of new blood into his body, but the blood failed to clot, and after three days his mother took the decision to have his life support machine switched off. Thomas Henty left a son, Tam Henty.
Legacy
A statue of Cooper was unveiled in his hometown of Caerphilly, Wales, in 2008 by fellow entertainer Sir Anthony Hopkins, who is patron of The Tommy Cooper Society. The statue was sculpted by James Done.   
In 2009 for Red Nose Day, a charity Red Nose was put on the statue, but the nose was stolen.   In a 2005 poll The Comedians' Comedian, Cooper was voted the sixth greatest comedy act ever by fellow comedians and comedy insiders. He is commonly cited as one of the best comedians of all time, with several polls placing him at number one. Jerome Flynn has toured with his own tribute show to Cooper called Just Like That. In February 2007, The Independent reported that Andy Harries, a producer of The Queen, was working on a dramatization about the last week of Tommy Cooper's life.  Harries described Cooper's death as "extraordinary" in that the whole thing was broadcast live on national television. dan le sac vs Scroobius Pip wrote a song entitled 'Tommy C—about Cooper's career and death—which appears on their 2008 album Angles.In 2012 the British Heart Foundation ran a series of adverts featuring Tommy Cooper to raise awareness of heart conditions. These included posters bearing his image together with radio adverts featuring classic Cooper jokes. 
Recordings

"Don't Jump Off the Roof Dad" (1961), words and music by Cy Coben, single, Palette Records PG 9019 (reached Number 40 in the UK singles chart)
"Country Dreaming" - 12” LP
"Ginger" - 7” single 
"Happy Tommy"- 7" single
"Just Like That" 7” single 
"Masters of Comedy"- CD 
"My Name Is Tommy" - 12” LP 
"No Arms Will Ever Hold You" - 7” single 
"Sweet Words Of Love" - 7" single 
"Tommy Cooper Very Best Of" - CD, DVD
"Walkin' Home From School" - 7" single 
"We'll Meet Again" - 7" single


References 
External links

The Tommy Cooper Society

 
 
DEFAULTSORT
















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Prosper Ménière
 Prosper Ménière (18 June 1799 – 7 February 1862) was born in Angers, France. He was  lycée- and university-educated and he excelled at humanities and classics. He completed his gold medal in medical studies at Hôtel-Dieu de Paris in 1826, and his M.D. in 1828. He then assisted Guillaume Dupuytren.Ménière was originally set to be an assistant professor in faculty, but political tensions disturbed his professorship and he was sent to control the spread of cholera. He received a legion of honor for his work, but never gained professorship. After securing the position of physician-in-chief at the Institute for deaf-mutes, he focused on the diseases of the ear.  Ménière's studies at the deaf-mute institute helped formulate his paper, On a particular kind of hearing loss resulting from lesions of the inner ear which ultimately led to the recognition of Ménière's disease. There is debate as to how Ménière's name is spelled.  Prosper himself was known to write his name as "Menière" while his son used the spelling "Ménière."  Many people omit the accent marks. 

References 

 
 
Footnotes 
External links

Prosper Ménière Society Official website

 
DEFAULTSORT





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Stevie Smith
 
Florence Margaret Smith, known as Stevie Smith (20 September 1902 – 7 March 1971) was an English poet and novelist.
LifeStevie Smith, born Florence Margaret Smith in Kingston upon Hull, was the second daughter of Ethel and Charles Smith. (Couzyn, Jeni 1985) Contemporary Women Poets. Bloodaxe, p. 32.  She was called "Peggy" within her family, but acquired the name "Stevie" as a young woman when she was riding in the park with a friend who said that she reminded him of the jockey Steve Donaghue. Her father was a shipping agent, a business that he had inherited from his father. As the company and his marriage began to fall apart, he ran away to sea and Smith saw very little of her father after that. Retrieved 22 March 2011. Subscription required.  He appeared occasionally on 24-hour shore leave and sent very brief postcards ("Off to Valparaiso, Love Daddy"). When she was three years old she moved with her mother and sister to Palmers Green in North London where Smith would live until her death in 1971.  She resented the fact that her father had abandoned his family. Later, when her mother became ill, her aunt Madge Spear (whom Smith called "The Lion Aunt") came to live with them, raised Smith and her elder sister Molly and became the most important person in Smith's life. Spear was a feminist who claimed to have "no patience" with men and, as Smith wrote, "she also had 'no patience' with Hitler". Smith and Molly were raised without men and thus became attached to their own independence, in contrast to what Smith described as the typical Victorian family atmosphere of "father knows best". When Smith was five she developed tubercular peritonitis and was sent to a sanatorium near Broadstairs, Kent, where she remained for three years. (Couzyn, Jeni 1985) Contemporary Women Poets. Bloodaxe, p. 33.  She related that her  preoccupation with death began when she was seven, at a time when she was very distressed at being sent away from her mother.  Death and fear fascinated her and provide the subjects of many of her poems. [Couzyn, Jeni 1985) Contemporary Women Poets. Bloodaxe, p. 35.  When suffering from the depression to which she was subject all her life she was so consoled by the thought of death as a release that, as she put it, she did not have to commit suicide. She wrote in several poems that death was "the only god who must come when he is called". Her mother died when Smith was 16 and suffered through her life from an acute nervousness, described as a mix of shyness and intense sensitivity. In the Poem "A House of Mercy", she wrote of her childhood house in North London:
 
It was a house of female habitation,
Two ladies fair inhabited the house,
And they were brave. For although Fear knocked loud
Upon the door, and said he must come in,
They did not let him in. 
 Smith was educated at Palmers Green High School and North London Collegiate School for Girls.  She spent the remainder of her life with her aunt, and worked as private secretary to Sir Neville Pearson with Sir George Newnes at Newnes Publishing Company in London from 1923 to 1953. Despite her secluded life, she corresponded and socialized widely with other writers and creative artists, including Elisabeth Lutyens, Sally Chilver, Inez Holden, Naomi Mitchison, Isobel English and Anna Kallin. After she retired from Sir Neville Pearson's service following a nervous breakdown she gave poetry readings and broadcasts on the BBC that gained her new friends and readers among a younger generation. Sylvia Plath became a fan of her poetry, "a desperate Smith-addict", and made an appointment to meet her but killed herself before the meeting could occur.Smith died of a brain tumour on 7 March 1971. Her last collection, Scorpion and other Poems was published posthumously in 1972, and the Collected Poems followed in 1975. Three novels were republished and there was a successful play based on her life, Stevie, written by Hugh Whitemore. It was filmed in 1978 by Robert Enders and starred Glenda Jackson and Mona Washbourne. She was described by her friends as being naive and selfish in some ways and formidably intelligent in others, having been raised by her aunt as both a spoiled child and a resolutely autonomous woman. Likewise, her political views vacillated between her aunt's Toryism and her friends' left-wing tendencies. Smith was celibate for most of her life, although she rejected the idea that she was lonely as a result, alleging that she had a number of intimate relationships with friends and family that kept her fulfilled. She never entirely abandoned or accepted the Anglican faith of her childhood, describing herself as a "lapsed atheist", and wrote sensitively about theological puzzles; "There is a God in whom I do not believe/Yet to this God my love stretches." Her 14-page essay of 1958, "The Necessity of Not Believing", concludes: "There is no reason to be sad, as some people are sad when they feel religion slipping off from them. There is no reason to be sad, it is a good thing."
CareerSmith wrote three novels, the first of which, Novel on Yellow Paper, was published in 1936. All her novels are lightly fictionalised accounts of her own life, which got her into trouble at times as people recognised themselves. Smith said that two of the male characters in her last book are different aspects of George Orwell, who was close to Smith (there were even rumours that they were lovers; he was married to his first wife at the time). She also wrote nine volumes of poetry. The first, A Good Time Was Had By All, established her as a poet: soon her poems were found in periodicals. A confessional poet, her style was often very dark; her characters were perpetually saying "goodbye" to their friends or welcoming death. At the same time her work has an eerie levity and can be very funny though it is neither light nor whimsical. "Stevie Smith often uses the word 'peculiar' and it is the best word to describe her effects" (Hermione Lee). She was never sentimental, undercutting any pathetic effects with the ruthless honesty of her humour. Apart from death, common subjects include loneliness; myth and legend; absurd vignettes, usually drawn from middle-class British life, war, human cruelty and religion. Though her poems were remarkably consistent in tone and quality throughout her life, their subject matter changed over time, with less of the outrageous wit of her youth and more reflection on suffering, faith and the end of life. Her best-known poem is "Not Waving but Drowning". She was awarded the Cholmondeley Award for Poets in 1966 and won the Queen's Gold Medal for poetry in 1969. (Couzyn, Jeni 1985) Contemporary Women Poets. Bloodaxe, p. 39. 
Fiction
Novel on Yellow Paper (Cape, 1936)Smith's first novel is structured as the random typings of a bored secretary, Pompey. She plays word games, retells stories from classical and popular culture, remembers events from her childhood, gossips about her friends and describes her family, particularly her beloved Aunt. As with all Smith's novels, there is an early scene where the heroine expresses feelings and beliefs which she will later feel significant, although ambiguous, regret for. In Novel on Yellow Paper that belief is anti-Semitism, where she feels elation at being the "only Goy" at a Jewish party. This apparently throwaway scene acts as a timebomb, which detonates at the centre of the novel when Pompey visits Germany as the Nazis are gaining power. With horror, she acknowledges the continuity between her feeling "Hurray for being a Goy" at the party and the madness that is overtaking Germany. The German scenes stand out in the novel, but perhaps equally powerful is her dissection  of failed love. She describes two unsuccessful relationships, first with the German Karl and then with the suburban Freddy. The final section of the novel describes with unusual clarity the intense pain of her break-up with Freddy.
Over the Frontier (Cape, 1938)Smith herself dismissed her second novel as a failed experiment, but its attempt to parody popular genre fiction in order to explore profound political issues now seems to anticipate post-modern fiction. If anti-Semitism was one of the key themes of Novel on Yellow Paper, Over the Frontier is concerned with militarism. In particular, she asks how the necessity of fighting Fascism can be achieved without descending into the nationalism and dehumanisation that fascism represents. After a failed romance the heroine, Pompey, suffers a breakdown and is sent to Germany to recuperate. At this point the novel changes style radically, as Pompey becomes part of an adventure/spy yarn in the style of John Buchan or Dornford Yates. As the novel becomes increasingly dreamlike, Pompey crosses over the frontier to become a spy and soldier. If her initial motives are idealistic, she becomes seduced by the intrigue and, ultimately, violence. The vision Smith offers is a bleak one: "Power and cruelty are the strengths of our lives, and only in their weakness is there love."
The Holiday (Chapman and Hall, 1949)Smith's final novel is her own favourite, and most fully realised. It is concerned with personal and political malaise in the immediate post-war period. Most of the characters are either employed in the army or civil service in post-war reconstruction, and its heroine, Celia, works for the Ministry as a crytographer and propagandist. The Holiday describes a series of hopeless relationships. Celia and her cousin Caz are in love, but cannot pursue their affair since it is believed that, because of their parents' adultery, they are half-brother and sister. Celia's other cousin Tom is in love with her, Basil is love with Tom, Tom is estranged from his father, Celia's beloved Uncle Heber, who pines for a reconciliation;  and Celia's best friend Tiny longs for the married Vera. These unhappy, futureless but intractable relationships are mirrored by the novel's political concerns. The unsustainability of the British Empire and the uncertainty over Britain's post-war role are constant themes, and many of the characters discuss their personal and political concerns as if they were seamlessly linked. Caz is on leave from Palestine and is deeply disillusioned, Tom goes mad during the war, and it is telling that the family scandal that blights Celia and Caz's lives took place in India. Just as Pompey's anti-semitism was tested in Novel on Yellow Paper, so Celia's traditional nationalism and sentimental support for colonialism is challenged throughout The Holiday.
Works
Novels

Novel on Yellow Paper (Cape, 1936)
Over the Frontier (Cape 1938)
The Holiday (Chapman and Hall, 1949)


Poetry collections

This Englishwoman (1937)
A Good Time Was Had By All (Cape, 1937)
Tender Only to One (Cape, 1938)
Mother, What Is Man? (Cape, 1942)
Harold's Leap (Cape, 1950)
Not Waving but Drowning (Deutsch, 1957)
Selected Poems (Longmans, 1962) includes 17 previously unpublished poems
The Frog Prince  (Longmans, 1966) includes 69 previously unpublished poems
The Best Beast (Longmans, 1969)
Two in One (Longmans, 1971) reprint of Selected Poems and The Frog Prince
Scorpion and Other Poems (Longmans, 1972)
Collected Poems (Allen Lane, 1975)
Selected Poems (Penguin, 1978)
New Selected Poems of Stevie Smith (New Directions, 1988)


Other

Some Are More Human Than Others: A Sketch-Book (Gaberbocchus, 1958)
Me Again: Uncollected Writings of Stevie Smith (Virago, 1984)
"The Necessity of Not Believing" (Gemini No. 5, Spring 1958, Vol. 2, No. 1)


Further reading

Stevie Smith and Authorship By William May Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-958337-4


References 
External links
Profiles 

Smith Profile, poems and audio files at the Poetry Archive. Retrieved 2010-12-12
Smith profile at Academy of American Poets. Retrieved 2010-12-12
Smith profile at Poetry Foundation. Poems and bibliography. Retrieved 2010-12-12


Archive

Stevie Smith papers. Archive at University of Tulsa McFarlin Library's in special collections department. Retrieved 2010-12-12
Archive at British Library. Retrieved 2010-12-12
The Stevie Smith Papers at Washington University in St. Louis. Retrieved 2010-12-12
 


Works

Stevie Smith reading "Not Waving But Drowning", BBC (includes poem text and poet's photo). Retrieved 2010-12-12
Author profile for Stevie Smith, LibraryThing. Retrieved 2010-12-12
"Pretty" by Stevie Smith from The Times, 13 May 2008. Retrieved 2010-12-12
Music to "Mother, Among the Dustbins", Retrieved 2011-06-28

 
 
DEFAULTSORT













 
 
 
 
 
	Obi-Wan Kenobi
 
 Obi-Wan Kenobi is a character in the Star Wars universe. He is one of several primary characters in the Star Wars series. Along with Anakin Skywalker (Darth Vader), R2-D2 and C-3PO, he is one of only four characters to appear in all six Star Wars films. He is portrayed in the original trilogy by Alec Guinness and in the prequel trilogy by Ewan McGregor, and is voiced by James Arnold Taylor in the film Star Wars: The Clone Wars  and its spin-off TV series.
Appearances
Films
Original trilogyObi-Wan Kenobi is first introduced in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope (1977), where he is played by Alec Guinness and is first seen rescuing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) from a group of Tusken Raiders. Obi-Wan takes Luke to his hut, where he reveals that he knew Luke's father, Anakin Skywalker, and served with him in the Clone Wars. He gives Anakin's lightsaber to Luke, having told him that Darth Vader (David Prowse/James Earl Jones) "betrayed and murdered" Anakin. Suddenly, R2-D2 plays a message from Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) that pleads for Obi-Wan to get the droid to her father on Alderaan. Obi-Wan offers to instruct Luke in the ways of the Force and asks him to join him on the quest; but Luke is only persuaded when his aunt and uncle are slain by the Empire, whereupon Obi-Wan takes him to deliver the message to Alderaan.Obi-Wan and Luke buy passage to Alderaan on the spaceship Millennium Falcon, piloted by smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and his partner Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew); but before they reach Alderaan, the planet is destroyed by the Death Star on the orders of Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing). On arrival, the Millennium Falcon is captured by the space station's tractor beam. Luke, Chewbacca and Han rescue the princess and attempt to get back to the Falcon. While that is going on, Obi-Wan disables the tractor beam so that the Falcon can escape and confronts his old apprentice, Darth Vader, in a lightsaber duel, eventually sacrificing himself so that Luke and the others can escape. Now disembodied, he speaks to Luke telepathically in the film's climactic battle scene, telling him to use the Force to destroy the Death Star.In Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back (1980), set three years after A New Hope, Obi-Wan appears as a Force ghost and instructs Luke to visit the Dagobah system for further training under Jedi Master Yoda (Frank Oz). After Luke has been further trained in the teachings of the Jedi, Obi-Wan appears in the Dagobah swamp to dissuade him from going to Cloud City, where Vader holds Han Solo and Princess Leia hostage. During Luke's battle with Vader, in which he loses his right hand, he learns that the Sith Lord is his father.In Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi (1983), set six months after The Empire Strikes Back (in the novelization), Obi-Wan appears on Dagobah to talk with Luke, who has learned from a dying Yoda that Vader is indeed his father. He explains Anakin Skywalker's fall from grace, and helps Luke realize that Leia is his sister. He then tells Luke that killing Vader is the only way to destroy the Empire. At the end of the film, Obi-Wan's ghost appears alongside the ghosts of Yoda and a redeemed Anakin Skywalker on the forest moon of Endor, watching Luke and his comrades as they celebrate the destruction of the second Death Star.
Prequel trilogyIn Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), set 32 years before A New Hope, Obi-Wan Kenobi, now played by Ewan McGregor, is seen as a young Jedi Padawan,   in which role he accompanies his master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) in negotiations with the Trade Federation, who are blockading the planet Naboo. Upon their arrival on the Federation's flagship, they are attacked by battle droids and are forced to retreat to the planet, where they meet a clumsy Gungan named Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best), who assists the Jedi in reaching Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman). In escaping the blockade, the ship is damaged and makes an unscheduled landing on Tatooine, where Qui-Gon meets Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), a young slave who shows such tremendous potential in the Force that Qui-Gon believes him to be the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force by destroying the Sith. The Jedi Council forbids Anakin's training, however, believing that the boy's future is clouded by the fear he exhibits.During the Battle of Naboo, Qui-Gon is mortally wounded by the Sith Lord Darth Maul (Ray Park/Peter Serafinowicz). Having nearly fallen to his death, Obi-Wan uses the Force to seize his master's abandoned lightsaber, and defeats Maul. The dying Qui-Gon then exacts his promise to train Anakin.For his heroics in defeating a Sith (being the first Jedi in 1,000 years to do so), Yoda bestows on Obi-Wan the rank of Jedi Knight, and reluctantly grants him the right to train Anakin.  
In Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), set 10 years after The Phantom Menace, Obi-Wan has become an experienced Jedi, and Anakin (Hayden Christensen) his padawan. By this time, Anakin has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.He and Anakin are required to protect Padmé, now a Senator, after an attempt on her life. Obi-Wan traces the attempt to the planet Kamino, and learns of a massive clone army that the planet's inhabitants are building for the Galactic Republic. He then meets with the bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison), the template for the clones, and deduces that he is the one responsible for the attempts on Padmé. Obi-Wan attempts to apprehend Fett, who escapes to Geonosis with his adopted son Boba (Daniel Logan). Obi-Wan follows them by placing a homing beacon on Fett's ship, Slave I.On Geonosis, Obi-Wan discovers the Confederacy of Independent Systems, known as the Separatists, a conspiracy of star systems bent on secession from the Republic. The renegades are led by former Jedi Count Dooku (Christopher Lee), who was once Qui-Gon's master. Obi-Wan is captured after sending a message to Anakin. While Obi-Wan is in captivity, Dooku reveals that the Galactic Senate is under the control of a Sith Lord named Darth Sidious.When Anakin and Padmé arrive on Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan, they are themselves captured, and all three are sentenced to death by the Geonosians. The executions are prevented by the arrival of Jedi and clone reinforcements, led by Jedi Masters Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) and Yoda. Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku in a duel, wherein Dooku strikes Anakin with Force lightning, then turns to Obi-Wan. The two duel and Dooku outmanoeuvres Obi-Wan, wounding him on both his left arm and leg. Dooku is about to deliver a killing blow when Anakin recovers from the lightning and blocks Dooku's attack. Dooku and Anakin fight a short duel, and Dooku cuts off Anakin's right lower arm (which is later replaced by a robotic prosthetic). Yoda arrives and fights Dooku as well, but the Sith Lord puts Anakin and Obi-Wan in mortal danger in order to create a distraction, and escapes. In Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), set three years after Attack of the Clones, Obi-Wan is a Jedi Master on the High Jedi Council and a general in the Army of the Republic. Anakin, now a full-fledged Jedi Knight, remains his partner, and the two have become war heroes and best friends. They are sent on a mission to rescue Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), who has been kidnapped by Dooku and Separatist leader General Grievous (Matthew Wood). When they find the captive Palpatine, Count Dooku engages them both in a duel. Obi-Wan is rendered unconscious by Dooku, but Anakin defeats the Sith Lord by cutting off both his hands. At Palpatine's urging, Anakin kills the defenseless Count in cold blood, a violation of the Jedi Code.  Palpatine then tries to convince Anakin to leave the unconscious Obi-Wan behind.  Anakin refuses, insisting to Palpatine that "his fate will be the same as ours". Soon after returning to Coruscant, Obi-Wan is called away to Utapau to confront General Grievous. Meanwhile, Anakin is angry at the Jedi Council for refusing him the rank of Master, and is also troubled by visions of Padmé, whom he married in the previous film, dying in childbirth. With Obi-Wan on the opposite end of the galaxy, Palpatine—who is in reality Darth Sidious—eventually corrupts Anakin to the dark side of the Force and takes him as his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader.After finding the Separatist encampment, Obi-Wan engages Grievous in battle, eventually killing him with a blaster. At the same time, Palpatine issues Order 66, directing clone troopers to turn on their Jedi generals. Obi-Wan survives the attempt on his life and escapes, rendezvousing with Yoda and Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) of Alderaan aboard Organa's ship, the Tantive IV. Obi-Wan returns to Coruscant, where he and Yoda discover that every Jedi in the Jedi Temple has been murdered, even the children. Obi-Wan sends a beacon to all surviving Jedi, instructing them to scatter across the galaxy and remain in hiding. A heartbroken Obi-Wan then watches a security hologram revealing that the assassin, Darth Vader, is actually Anakin. Subsequently, Obi-Wan and Yoda split up to confront the two Sith Lords: Obi-Wan to fight Vader and Yoda to battle Palpatine. Obi-Wan wishes to fight Sidious to avoid having to kill his best friend, but Yoda insists that Obi-Wan is not strong enough to fight the new Emperor of the galaxy, and would have to accept that the Anakin he knows no longer exists, having been "consumed by Darth Vader."Unaware of his former Padawan's location, Obi-Wan visits Padmé and explains to her what Vader has done. Padmé refuses to believe him, and will not reveal Vader's whereabouts, knowing that Obi-Wan will attempt to kill him. At this point, Obi-Wan realizes that Vader is the father of Padmé's child and tells her he is "so sorry." Padmé sets out to the Mustafar system to confront her husband herself, and Obi-Wan secretly stows away in her ship.Arriving on Mustafar, Padmé confronts Vader and realizes with horror that Obi-Wan had been telling the truth. When Obi-Wan emerges from Padmé's ship, an enraged Vader immediately suspects that Padmé has betrayed him, and uses the dark side of the Force to choke her into unconsciousness. Obi-Wan and Vader then fight a furious lightsaber duel, which ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's legs and left arm in midair. Vader then slides too close to a lava flow and catches fire, almost burning to death. Unable to bring himself to deliver a fatal blow, Obi-Wan retrieves his former apprentice's lightsaber and returns to the shuttle, leaving Vader to die. However, Vader clings to life long enough to be rescued by Palpatine, who rebuilds him as the black armor-clad cyborg first seen in the original trilogy.Obi-Wan watches helplessly as Padmé dies after giving birth to twins. Luke is put on Tatooine with Owen Lars (Joel Edgerton), Anakin's stepbrother, and Obi-Wan agrees to look after him in secret; Luke's twin sister Leia, meanwhile, is adopted by Bail Organa. Yoda, unsuccessful in his confrontation with Palpatine, then tells Obi-Wan that he has more training for him: Qui-Gon's spirit will teach him how to retain his identity through the Force and commune with the living after death. The film ends as Obi-Wan gives the infant Luke to Lars and his wife Beru (Bonnie Piesse), and disappears into the distance.
Expanded universeObi-Wan Kenobi appears extensively in the Star Wars "Expanded Universe" of comic books, novels, and video games. This material portrays the events in the character's life outside of the six films.
TelevisionObi-Wan is a major character in the animated microseries Star Wars: Clone Wars and the CGI animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, which both cover the period between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith. It is also revealed that he is granted a seat on the Jedi Council during this time. Obi-Wan is voiced by James Arnold Taylor in both versions.Among Obi-Wan's adventures in the microseries are a battle with the Intergalactic Banking Clan and an air strike on the planet Rattatak. In the microseries' final episode, he and Anakin are sent to the Outer Rim of the galaxy, a journey that climaxes in a quest to save the planet Nelvaan from the Techno Union.
NovelsMany Expanded Universe novels detail Obi-Wan's exploits before, during, and after the six films.Obi-Wan's life prior to The Phantom Menace is portrayed mostly in Jude Watson's Jedi Apprentice and Jedi Quest series. The Jedi Apprentice books follow his adventures as Qui-Gon Jinn's Padawan. Notable events in the series include battling the Dark Jedi Xanatos, falling in love with fellow Padawan Siri Tachi, and going on his first independent mission. The Jedi Quest books detail his adventures with Anakin in the years leading up to Attack of the Clones.His heroism just before and during the Clone Wars is portrayed in novels such as Outbound Flight, The Approaching Storm, and The Cestus Deception.Obi-Wan's life between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope is  portrayed mostly in Jude Watson's The Last of the Jedi series. Set roughly a year after the fall of the Republic, the series follows Obi-Wan as he seeks out possible survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, most notably Anakin's former rival, Ferus Olin. The books also portray Obi-Wan adjusting to life as a hermit on Tatooine, and quietly watching over the infant Luke Skywalker. He also discovers that Vader is still alive after seeing him on the Holonet, the galaxy's official news source.Obi-Wan appears in spirit form in many novels set after Return of the Jedi. In The Truce at Bakura, he appears to Luke to warn him about the threat presented by the Ssi-ruuk; in The Lost City of the Jedi, he guides Luke to the titular city on Yavin IV; in Heir to the Empire, meanwhile, he bids farewell to Luke, explaining that he must abandon his spiritual form to "move on" to a new, higher plane of consciousness. Before parting, Luke tells him that Obi-Wan was like a father to him, to which Obi-Wan replies that he loved Luke like a son.
Video gamesObi-Wan appears in many video games. He is a playable character in all four Lego Star Wars video games, Battlefront II, and Renegade Squadron of the Battlefront series. He is also the lead character in Star Wars: Obi-Wan. The older version, Ben Kenobi, is only playable in Lego Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy and The Complete Saga, Renegade Squadron, and Star Wars: The Force Unleashed in multiplayer mode. He also appears in Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance, Star Wars: Jedi Power Battles and Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels as a playable character.
Comic booksIn the comic book series Star Wars: Republic, Obi-Wan faces many grave threats while fighting against the Separatists. Among other notable storylines, he is kidnapped and tortured by Dooku's minion Asajj Ventress before being rescued by Anakin ("Hate & Fear"), and apprehends corrupted Jedi Master Quinlan Vos ("The Dreadnaughts of Rendili"). Throughout the series, he grows increasingly wary of Palpatine's designs on the Republic—and his influence on Anakin.In the non-canon story "Old Wounds", set a few years after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Obi-Wan confronts a resurrected Darth Maul on Tatooine to protect Luke Skywalker. The duel ends when Owen Lars shoots and kills Maul; he then warns Obi-Wan to stay away from his nephew. Through the Force, Obi-Wan reassures Luke that he will be there for him when needed.
Cultural impact 
The character is loosely inspired by General Makabe Rokurōta, a character from The Hidden Fortress played by Toshirō Mifune, whom series creator George Lucas also considered casting as Obi-Wan.  Mad magazine parodied the original film under the title Star Roars and included a character named "Oldie Von Moldie"; a grizzled 97-year-old whose lightsaber runs on an extension cord. The Shanghai nightclub shown in the beginning of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is called "Club Obi-Wan" because George Lucas wrote both the Star Wars and Indiana Jones Series. A real bar/club by this name existed in the Xihai district of Beijing, China but closed in the summer of 2010. The Super Mario Bros. Super Show! episode "Star Koopa", being a spoof of Star Wars, also had its own parody of Obi-Wan Kenobi called Obi-Wan Toadi. The 1998 Animaniacs episode "Star Warners", which spoofed Star Wars, featured Slappy Squirrel portraying a parody of Obi-Wan Kenobi as "Slappy Wanna Nappy". In the Family Guy episode "Blue Harvest", Obi-Wan is parodied by the character Herbert. In the short film Thumb Wars Obi-Wan is parodied as the character Oobedoob Benubi. In the film his full name is Oobedoob Scooby-Doobi Benubi, "the silliest name in the galaxy". In the 1977 Star Wars parody Hardware Wars, Obi-Wan is parodied by the character "Augie Ben Doggie". In French Internet subculture, "Obi-Wan Kenobi" became an expression meaning "your question does not make sense", and is said when one does not know what to answer but wants to respond in an amusing way. It was popularised by Les Guignols de l'info, which made a parody of the French version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? in which for every question, the fourth choice was invariably "Obi-Wan Kenobi" (and the question invariably nonsense). Humorous multiple choice questionnaires made on the internet since often featured an "Obi-Wan Kenobi" option. TV Tropes  uses Obi-Wan's name for the archetype mentor figure. In 2003, the American Film Institute selected Obi-Wan Kenobi as the 37th greatest movie hero of all time.  He was also listed as IGN's third greatest Star Wars character,  as well as one of UGO Networks's favorite heroes of all time.   In 2004 the Council of the Commune Lubicz in Poland passed a resolution giving the name Obi-Wan Kenobi to one of the streets in Grabowiec, a small village near Toruń.  The street was named in 2005. The spelling of the street name, Obi-Wana Kenobiego is the genitive form of the noun in the Polish language: the street of Obi-Wan Kenobi. "ul." is an abbreviation of ulica, the Polish for street. Manu Ginobili from the San Antonio Spurs NBA team, has sometimes been referred to as Obi Wan Ginobili, due to his quick movements and play on the court.In the Disney Channel show Good Luck Charlie, the fifth Duncan Baby was called Toby Wan Kenobi Duncan.
See also 

Qui-Gon Jinn
Darth Vader
Luke Skywalker
Jedi
The Force


References 

The New Essential Guide to Characters, 1st edition, 2002. Daniel Wallace, Michael Sutfin, ISBN 0-345-44900-2
Star Wars Episode I Who's Who: A Pocket Guide to Characters of the Phantom Menace, hardcover, 1999. Ryder Windham, ISBN 0-7624-0519-8
Star Wars: Power of Myth, 1st edition paperback, 2000. DK Publishing, ISBN 0-7894-5591-9
Star Wars: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 1998. David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-3481-4
Star Wars: The Phantom Menace: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 1999. David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-4701-0
Star Wars: Attack of the Clones: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 2002. David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-8588-5
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 2005. James Luceno, ISBN 0-7566-1128-8
Revised Core Rulebook (Star Wars Roleplaying Game), 1st edition, 2002. Bill Slavicsek, Andy Collins, J.D. Wiker, Steve Sansweet, ISBN 0-7869-2876-X
Star Wars Roleplaying Game Core Rulebook, 1st edition, 2000. Bill Slavicsek, Andy Collins, ISBN 0-7869-1793-8
 
External links 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEFAULTSORT






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Antonio Gramsci
 
 
Antonio Gramsci ( ) (22 January 1891 – 27 April 1937) was an Italian writer, politician, political theorist, sociologist, and linguist. He was a founding member and onetime leader of the Communist Party of Italy and was imprisoned by Benito Mussolini's Fascist regime.Gramsci was one of the most important Marxist thinkers in the 20th century. His writings are heavily concerned with the analysis of culture and political leadership and he is notable as a highly original thinker within modern European thought. He is renowned for his concept of cultural hegemony as a means of maintaining the state in a capitalist society.
Life
Early lifeGramsci was born in Ales, on the island of Sardinia, the fourth of seven sons of Francesco Gramsci (1860–1937), a low-level official from Gaeta, and his wife, Giuseppina  Marcias (1861–1932). Gramsci's father was of Arbëreshë descent,  while his mother belonged to a local landowning family. The senior Gramsci's financial difficulties and troubles with the police forced the family to move about through several villages in Sardinia until they finally settled in Ghilarza.In 1898 Francesco was convicted of embezzlement  and imprisoned, reducing his family to destitution.  The young Antonio had to abandon schooling and work at various casual jobs until his father's release in 1904. The boy suffered from health problems: a malformation of the spine owing to a childhood accident left him hunch-backed and underdeveloped.  He was also plagued by various internal disorders throughout his life.Gramsci completed secondary school in Cagliari, where he lodged with his elder brother Gennaro, a former soldier whose time on the mainland had made him a militant socialist. However, Gramsci's sympathies then did not lie with socialism, but rather with the grievances of impoverished Sardinian peasants and miners.  They perceived their neglect as a result of privileges enjoyed by the rapidly industrialising North, and they tended to turn to Sardinian nationalism as a response.
Turin
In 1911, Gramsci won a scholarship to study at the University of Turin, sitting the exam at the same time as future cohort Palmiro Togliatti. At Turin, he read literature and took a keen interest in linguistics, which he studied under Matteo Bartoli. Gramsci was in Turin as it was going through industrialization, with the Fiat and Lancia factories' recruiting workers from poorer regions. Trade unions became established, and the first industrial social conflicts started to emerge. Gramsci frequented socialist circles as well as associating with Sardinian emigrants. His worldview shaped by both his earlier experiences in Sardinia and his environment on the mainland, Gramsci joined the Italian Socialist Party in late 1913.Despite showing talent for his studies, Gramsci had financial problems and poor health. Together with his growing political commitment, these led to his abandoning his education in early 1915. By this time, he had acquired an extensive knowledge of history and philosophy. At university, he had come into contact with the thought of Antonio Labriola, Rodolfo Mondolfo, Giovanni Gentile and, most importantly, Benedetto Croce, possibly the most widely respected Italian intellectual of his day. Such thinkers espoused a brand of Hegelian Marxism to which Labriola had given the name "philosophy of praxis". Though Gramsci would later use this phrase to escape the prison censors, his relationship with this current of thought was ambiguous throughout his life.From 1914 onward, Gramsci's writings for socialist newspapers such as Il Grido del Popolo earned him a reputation as a notable journalist.  In 1916 he became co-editor of the Piedmont edition of Avanti!, the Socialist Party official organ. An articulate and prolific writer of political theory, Gramsci proved a formidable commentator, writing on all aspects of Turin's social and political life.Gramsci was, at this time, also involved in the education and organisation of Turin workers: he spoke in public for the first time in 1916 and gave talks on topics such as Romain Rolland, the French Revolution, the Paris Commune and the emancipation of women. In the wake of the arrest of Socialist Party leaders that followed the revolutionary riots of August 1917, Gramsci became one of Turin's leading socialists when he was both elected to the party's Provisional Committee and made editor of Il Grido del Popolo.In April 1919 with Togliatti, Angelo Tasca and Umberto Terracini Gramsci set up the weekly newspaper L'Ordine Nuovo (The New Order). In October of the same year, despite being divided into various hostile factions, the Socialist Party moved by a large majority to join the Third International. The L'Ordine Nuovo group was seen by Vladimir Lenin as closest in orientation to the Bolsheviks, and it received his backing against the anti-parliamentary programme of the extreme left Amadeo Bordiga.Amongst the various tactical debates that took place within the party, Gramsci's group was mainly distinguished by its advocacy of workers' councils, which had come into existence in Turin spontaneously during the large strikes of 1919 and 1920. For Gramsci these councils were the proper means of enabling workers to take control of the task of organising production. Although he believed his position at this time to be in keeping with Lenin's policy of "All power to the Soviets", his stance was attacked by Bordiga for betraying a syndicalist tendency influenced by the thought of Georges Sorel and Daniel DeLeon. By the time of the defeat of the Turin workers in spring 1920, Gramsci was almost alone in his defence of the councils.
In the Communist Party of ItalyThe failure of the workers' councils to develop into a national movement led Gramsci to believe that a Communist Party in the Leninist sense was needed. The group around L'Ordine Nuovo declaimed incessantly against the Italian Socialist Party's centrist leadership and ultimately allied with Bordiga's far larger "abstentionist" faction. On 21 January 1921, in the town of Livorno (Leghorn), the Communist Party of Italy (Partito Comunista d'Italia – PCI) was founded. Gramsci supported against Bordiga the Arditi del Popolo, a militant anti-fascist group which struggled against the Blackshirts.Gramsci would be a leader of the party from its inception but was subordinate to Bordiga, whose emphasis on discipline, centralism and purity of principles dominated the party's programme until the latter lost the leadership in 1924.In 1922 Gramsci travelled to Russia as a representative of the new party. Here, he met Julia Schucht, a young violinist whom Gramsci later married and by whom he had two sons, Delio and Giuliano. The Russian mission coincided with the advent of Fascism in Italy, and Gramsci returned with instructions to foster, against the wishes of the PCI leadership, a united front of leftist parties against fascism. Such a front would ideally have had the PCI at its centre, through which Moscow would have controlled all the leftist forces, but others disputed this potential supremacy: socialists did have a certain tradition in Italy too, while the communist party seemed relatively young and too radical. Many believed that an eventual coalition led by communists would have functioned too remotely from political debate, and thus would have run the risk of isolation.In late 1922 and early 1923, Benito Mussolini's government embarked on a campaign of repression against the opposition parties, arresting most of the PCI leadership, including Bordiga. At the end of 1923, Gramsci travelled from Moscow to Vienna, where he tried to revive a party torn by factional strife.In 1924 Gramsci, now recognised as head of the PCI, gained election as a deputy for the Veneto. He started organizing the launch of the official newspaper of the party, called L'Unità (Unity), living in Rome while his family stayed in Moscow. At its Lyons Congress in January 1926, Gramsci's theses calling for a united front to restore democracy to Italy were adopted by the party.In 1926 Joseph Stalin's manoeuvres inside the Bolshevik party moved Gramsci to write a letter to the Comintern, in which he deplored opposition led by Leon Trotsky, but also underlined some presumed faults of the leader. Togliatti, in Moscow as a representative of the party, received the letter, opened it, read it, and decided not to deliver it. This caused a difficult conflict between Gramsci and Togliatti which they never completely resolved. 
Imprisonment and death
On November 9, 1926 the Fascist government enacted a new wave of emergency laws, taking as a pretext an alleged attempt on Mussolini's life several days earlier. The fascist police arrested Gramsci, despite his parliamentary immunity, and brought him to Roman prison Regina Coeli.At his trial, Gramsci's prosecutor stated, "For twenty years we must stop this brain from functioning". Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, Lawrence and Wishart, 1971, ISBN 0-85315-280-2, p.lxxxix.  He received an immediate sentence of 5 years in confinement on the island of Ustica and the following year he received a sentence of 20 years of prison in Turi, near Bari. In prison his health deteriorated. In 1932, a project for exchanging political prisoners (including Gramsci) between Italy and the Soviet Union failed. In 1934 he gained conditional freedom on health grounds, after visiting hospitals in Civitavecchia, Formia and Rome. He died in 1937, at the "Quisisana" Hospital in Rome at the age of 46. His ashes are buried in the Protestant Cemetery there.In an interview archbishop Luigi de Magistris, former head of the Apostolic Penitentiary of the Holy See stated that during Gramsci's final illness, he "returned to the faith of his infancy" and "died taking the sacraments."    However, Italian State documents on his death show that no religious official was sent for or received by Gramsci.  Other witness accounts of his death also do not mention any conversion to Catholicism or recantation by Gramsci of his atheism.  
ThoughtGramsci is seen by many  as one of the most important Marxist thinkers of the twentieth century, in particular as a key thinker in the development of Western Marxism. He wrote more than 30 notebooks and 3000 pages of history and analysis during his imprisonment. These writings, known as the Prison Notebooks, contain Gramsci's tracing of Italian history and nationalism, as well as some ideas in Marxist theory, critical theory and educational theory associated with his name, such as:

Cultural hegemony as a means of maintaining and legitimising the capitalist state.
The need for popular workers' education to encourage development of intellectuals from the working class.
An analysis of the modern capitalist state that distinguishes between political society, which dominates directly and coercively, and civil society, where leadership is constituted by means of consent.
"Absolute historicism".
A critique of economic determinism that opposes fatalistic interpretations of Marxism.
A critique of philosophical materialism.


Hegemony 
 
Hegemony was a term previously used by Marxists such as Vladimir Ilyich Lenin to denote the political leadership of the working-class in a democratic revolution. Gramsci greatly expanded this concept, developing an acute analysis of how the ruling capitalist class – the bourgeoisie – establishes and maintains its control.Orthodox Marxism had predicted that socialist revolution was inevitable in capitalist societies. By the early 20th century, no such revolution had occurred in the most advanced nations. Capitalism, it seemed, was even more entrenched than ever. Capitalism, Gramsci suggested, maintained control not just through violence and political and economic coercion, but also through ideology. The bourgeoisie developed a hegemonic culture, which propagated its own values and norms so that they became the 'common sense' values of all. People in the working-class (and other classes) identified their own good with the good of the bourgeoisie, and helped to maintain the status quo rather than revolting.To counter the notion that bourgeois values represented 'natural' or 'normal' values for society, the working class needed to develop a culture of its own. Lenin held that culture was 'ancillary' to political objectives but for Gramsci it was fundamental to the attainment of power that cultural hegemony be achieved first. In Gramsci's view, a class cannot dominate in modern conditions by merely advancing its own narrow economic interests. Neither can it dominate purely through force and coercion. Rather, it must exert intellectual and moral leadership, and make alliances and compromises with a variety of forces. Gramsci calls this union of social forces a ‘historic bloc’, taking a term from Georges Sorel. This bloc forms the basis of consent to a certain social order, which produces and re-produces the hegemony of the dominant class through a nexus of institutions, social relations and ideas. In this manner, Gramsci developed a theory that emphasized the importance of the political and ideological superstructure in both maintaining and fracturing relations of the economic base.Gramsci stated that bourgeois cultural values were tied to folklore, popular culture and  religion, and therefore much of his analysis of hegemonic culture is aimed at these. He was also impressed by the influence Roman Catholicism had and the care the Church had taken to prevent an excessive gap developing between the religion of the learned and that of the less educated. Gramsci saw Marxism as a marriage of the purely intellectual critique of religion found in Renaissance humanism and the elements of the Reformation that had appealed to the masses. For Gramsci, Marxism could supersede religion only if it met people's spiritual needs, and to do so people would have to think of it as an expression of their own experience.For Gramsci, hegemonic dominance ultimately relied on a "consented" coercion, and in a "crisis of authority" the "masks of consent" slip away, revealing the fist of force.
Intellectuals and educationGramsci gave much thought to the question of the role of intellectuals in society. Famously, he stated that all men are intellectuals, in that all have intellectual and rational faculties, but not all men have the social function of intellectuals.  He did not see modern intellectuals as simply talkers. Rather, they were practically-minded directors and organisers who produced hegemony by means of ideological apparatuses such as education and the media. Furthermore, he distinguished between a "traditional" intelligentsia which sees itself (wrongly) as a class apart from society, and the thinking groups which every class produces from its own ranks "organically". Such "organic" intellectuals do not simply describe social life in accordance with scientific rules, but instead articulate, through the language of culture, the feelings and experiences which the masses could not express for themselves. The need to create a working-class culture relates to Gramsci's call for a kind of education that could develop working-class intellectuals, who would not simply introduce Marxist ideology from without the proletariat, but rather renovate and make critical of the status quo the already existing intellectual activity of the masses. His ideas about an education system for this purpose correspond with the notion of critical pedagogy and popular education as theorized and practised in later decades by Paulo Freire in Brazil, and have much in common with the thought of Frantz Fanon. For this reason, partisans of adult and popular education consider Gramsci an important voice to this day.
State and civil society 
Gramsci's theory of hegemony is tied to his conception of the capitalist state. Gramsci does not understand the 'state' in the narrow sense of the government. Instead, he divides it between 'political society' (the police, the army, legal system, etc.) – the arena of political institutions and legal constitutional control – and 'civil society' (the family, the education system, trade unions, etc.) – commonly seen as the 'private' or 'non-state' sphere, including the economy. He stresses, however, that the division is purely conceptual and that the two, in reality, often overlap. The capitalist state, Gramsci claims, rules through force plus consent: political society is the realm of force and civil society is the realm of consent.Gramsci proffers that under modern capitalism, the bourgeoisie can maintain its economic control by allowing certain demands made by trade unions and mass political parties within civil society to be met by the political sphere. Thus, the bourgeoisie engages in passive revolution by going beyond its immediate economic interests and allowing the forms of its hegemony to change. Gramsci posits that movements such as reformism and fascism, as well as the 'scientific management' and assembly line methods of Frederick Taylor and Henry Ford respectively, are examples of this.Drawing from Machiavelli, he argues that 'The Modern Prince' – the revolutionary party – is the force that will allow the working-class to develop organic intellectuals and an alternative hegemony within civil society. For Gramsci, the complex nature of modern civil society means that a 'war of position', carried out by revolutionaries through political agitation, the trade unions, advancement of 'proletarian' culture, and other ways to create an opposing civil society was necessary along side a 'war of maneuver' — a direct revolution — in order to have a successful revolution without a danger of a counter-revolution or degeneration.Despite his claim that the lines between the two may be blurred, Gramsci rejects the state-worship that results from identifying political society with civil society, as was done by the Jacobins and Fascists. He believes the proletariat's historical task is to create a 'regulated society' and defines the 'withering away of the state' as the full development of civil society's ability to regulate itself.
HistoricismGramsci, like the early Marx, was an emphatic proponent of historicism. In Gramsci's view, all meaning derives from the relation between human practical activity (or "praxis") and the "objective" historical and social processes of which it is a part. Ideas cannot be understood outside their social and historical context, apart from their function and origin. The concepts by which we organise our knowledge of the world do not derive primarily from our relation to things (to an objective reality), but rather from the social relations between the users of those concepts. As a result, there is no such thing as an unchanging "human nature", but only an idea of such which varies historically. Furthermore, philosophy and science do not "reflect" a reality independent of man, but rather are only "true" in that they express the real developmental trend of a given historical situation.For the majority of Marxists, truth was truth no matter when and where it is known, and scientific knowledge (which included Marxism) accumulated historically as the advance of truth in this everyday sense. On this view, Marxism could not be said to not belong to the illusory realm of the superstructure because it is a science. In contrast, Gramsci believed Marxism was "true" in a socially pragmatic sense: by articulating the class consciousness of the proletariat, Marxism expressed the "truth" of its times better than any other theory. This anti-scientistic and anti-positivist stance was indebted to the influence of Benedetto Croce. However, it should be underlined that Gramsci's "absolute historicism" broke with Croce's tendency to secure a metaphysical synthesis in historical "destiny". Though Gramsci repudiates the charge, his historical account of truth has been criticised as a form of relativism.
Critique of "economism"In a notable pre-prison article entitled "The Revolution against  ", Gramsci claimed that the October Revolution in Russia had invalidated the idea that socialist revolution had to await the full development of capitalist forces of production. This reflected his view that Marxism was not a determinist philosophy. The principle of the causal "primacy" of the forces of production, he held, was a misconception of Marxism. Both economic changes and cultural changes are expressions of a "basic historical process", and it is difficult to say which sphere has primacy over the other. The belief, widespread within the workers’ movement in its earliest years, that it would inevitably triumph due to "historical laws", was, in Gramsci's view, a product of the historical circumstances of an oppressed class restricted mainly to defensive action. Such a fatalistic doctrine was to be abandoned as a hindrance once the working-class became able to take the initiative. Because Marxism is a "philosophy of praxis", it cannot rely on unseen "historical laws" as the agents of social change. History is defined by human praxis and therefore includes human will. Nonetheless, will-power cannot achieve anything it likes in any given situation: when the consciousness of the working-class reaches the stage of development necessary for action, it will encounter historical circumstances that cannot be arbitrarily altered. However, it is not predetermined by historical inevitability or "destiny" as to which of several possible developments will take place as a result.His critique of economism also extended to that practiced by the syndicalists of the Italian trade unions. He believed that many trade unionists had settled for a reformist, gradualist approach in that they had refused to struggle on the political front in addition to the economic front. For Gramsci, much as the ruling class can look beyond its own immediate economic interests to reorganise the forms of its own hegemony, so must the working-class present its own interests as congruous with the universal advancement of society. While Gramsci envisioned the trade unions as one organ of a counter-hegemonic force in capitalist society, the trade union leaders simply saw these organizations as a means to improve conditions within the existing structure. Gramsci referred to the views of these trade unionists as "vulgar economism", which he equated to covert reformism and even liberalism.
Critique of materialismBy virtue of his belief that human history and collective praxis determine whether any philosophical question is meaningful or not, Gramsci's views run contrary to the metaphysical materialism and 'copy' theory of perception advanced by Engels   and Lenin, though he does not explicitly state this. For Gramsci, Marxism does not deal with a reality that exists in and for itself, independent of humanity. The concept of an objective universe outside of human history and human praxis was, in his view, analogous to belief in God; there could be no objectivity, but only a universal intersubjectivity to be established in a future communist society. Natural history was thus only meaningful in relation to human history. In his view philosophical materialism resulted from a lack of critical thought, and could not, as Lenin  claimed, be said to oppose religious dogma. Despite this, Gramsci resigned himself to the existence of this arguably cruder form of Marxism: the proletariat's status as a dependent class meant that Marxism, as its philosophy, could often only be expressed in the form of popular superstition and common sense. Nonetheless, it was necessary to effectively challenge the ideologies of the educated classes, and to do so Marxists must present their philosophy in a more sophisticated guise, and attempt to genuinely understand their opponents’ views.
InfluenceGramsci's thought emanates from the organized left, but he has also become an important figure in current academic discussions within cultural studies and critical theory. Political theorists from the center and the right have also found insight in his concepts; his idea of hegemony, for example, has become widely cited. His influence is particularly strong in contemporary political science (see Neo-gramscianism). His work also heavily influenced intellectual discourse on popular culture and scholarly popular culture studies in whom many have found the potential for political or ideological resistance to dominant government and business interests.His critics charge him with fostering a notion of power struggle through ideas. They find the Gramscian approach to philosophical analysis, reflected in current academic controversies, to be in conflict with open-ended, liberal inquiry grounded in apolitical readings of the classics of Western culture. Gramscians would counter that thoughts of "liberal inquiry" and "apolitical reading" are utterly naive; for the Gramscians, these are intellectual devices used to maintain the hegemony of the capitalist class. To credit or blame Gramsci for the travails of current academic politics is an odd turn of history, since Gramsci himself was never an academic, and was in fact deeply intellectually engaged with Italian culture, history, and current liberal thought.As a socialist, Gramsci's legacy has been disputed. Togliatti, who led the Party (renamed as Italian Communist Party, PCI) after World War II and whose gradualist approach was a forerunner to Eurocommunism, claimed that the PCI's practices during this period were congruent with Gramscian thought. Others, however, have argued that Gramsci was a Left Communist, who would likely have been expelled from his Party if prison had not prevented him from regular contact with Moscow during the leadership of Joseph Stalin.
Influences on Gramsci's thought

Niccolò Machiavelli — 16th century Italian writer who greatly influenced Gramsci's theory of the state.
Karl Marx — philosopher, historian, economist and founder of Marxism.
Vladimir Lenin — founder of the Bolshevik Party and a leader of the Russian Revolution.
Antonio Labriola — Italy's first notable Marxist theorist, believed Marxism's main feature was the nexus it established between history and philosophy.
Georges Sorel — French syndicalist writer who rejected the inevitability of historical progress.
Vilfredo Pareto — Italian economist and sociologist, known for his theory on mass and elite interaction.
Henri Bergson — French philosopher.
Benedetto Croce — Italian liberal, anti-Marxist and idealist philosopher whose thought Gramsci subjected to careful and thorough critique.
Giovanni Gentile — Italian neo-Hegelian philosopher


Later thinkers influenced by Gramsci 
 

Zackie Achmat
Louis Althusser 
Perry Anderson
Giulio Angioni
Michael Apple
Stanley Aronowitz
Giovanni Arrighi
Zygmunt Bauman
Enrico Berlinguer
Homi K. Bhabha
Gordon Brown 
Judith Butler
Alex Callinicos
Robert W. Cox
Alain de Benoist
Ernesto de Martino
Marilena de Souza Chaui
Rudi Dutschke
John Fiske
Paulo Freire
Néstor García Canclini
Eugenio Garin
Eugene D. Genovese
Stephen Gill 
Sam Gindin 
Todd Gitlin
Paul Gottfried
Stuart Hall
David Harvey
Hamish Henderson
Eric Hobsbawm
Samuel P. Huntington
Bob Jessop
Ernesto Laclau
Subcomandante Marcos
Chantal Mouffe
Antonio Negri
Luigi Nono
Michael Omi
Pier Paolo Pasolini
Antonio Pigliaru
Michelangelo Pira
Nicos Poulantzas
Gyan Prakash
William I. Robinson
Edward Said 
Ato Sekyi-Otu
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak
E.P. Thompson
Emily Thomas
Cornel West
Howard Winant
Raymond Williams
Eric Wolf
Howard Zinn
Partha Chatterjee
Eqbal Ahmad 
Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff 
 
Gramsci's influence in popular culture
Music:

Gramsci Melodic – American (Pittsburgh) synthpop band
Scritti Politti – British alternative band
Billy Bragg – English folk musician  

Theatre:

Occupations – Gramsci is a central character in Trevor Griffiths's 1970 play about workers taking over car factories in Turin in 1920.

Television: Emily Thomas

Spaced – Series 1 Episode 5 features a dog named Gramsci, named by his owner after "an Italian Marxist" to help in his campaign against the ruling class by hunting down the rich. One character claimed that the dog could smell wealth from twenty feet away.

Cities

Genoa A major road going through the lower portion of Genoa, along the coast, is named after Antonio Gramsci.


Bibliography

Pre-Prison Writing (Cambridge University Press)
The Prison Notebooks (three volumes) (Columbia University Press)
Selections from the Prison Notebooks (International Publishers)


See also

Cultural hegemony
Subaltern Studies
Reformism
Articulation (sociology)
Risorgimento
Praxis School
Liberation theology
Antonio Gramsci Battalion


Endnotes 
Sources 

 
 
 
Harman Chris the Prison Notebooks and Philosophy
 
 
 
 
Pastore, Gerardo (2011), Antonio Gramsci. Questione sociale e questione sociologica. Livorno: Belforte. ISBN 978-88-7467-059-8.
 
 
External links 
 
 

Gramsci's writings at MIA
The International Gramsci Society
"Notes on Language". TELOS
Fondazione Instituto Gramsci
Special issue of International Socialism journal with a collection on Gramsci's legacy
Roberto Robaina: Gramsci and revolution: a necessary clarification
Dan Jakopovich: Revolution and the Party in Gramsci's Thought: A Modern Application
Gramsci's contribution to the field of adult and popular education
The life and work of Antonio Gramsci
  Antonio Gramsci, 1891–1937
The Praxis Prism – The Epistemology of Antonio Gramsci
Gramsci Links Archive
  
 
  
DEFAULTSORT




















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Sophie Wilson
 
 
 
 Sophie Wilson (born 'Roger Wilson' in Leeds, England, in 1957) is a British computer scientist. She is known for designing the Acorn Micro-Computer, the first of a long line of computers sold by Acorn Computers Ltd,    as well as the instruction set of the highly successful ARM processor.
Life and career
Wilson was educated at Cambridge University. In 1978, she designed the Acorn Micro-Computer, the first of a long line of computers sold by Acorn Computers Ltd. In 1981, Wilson extended the Acorn Atom's BASIC programming language dialect into an improved version for the Acorn Proton, a microcomputer that enabled Acorn to win the contract with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) for their ambitious computer education project, whereupon the Proton became the BBC Micro and its BASIC was developed into BBC BASIC. In 1983, she designed the instruction set for one of the first RISC processors, the Acorn RISC Machine (ARM), later to become one of the most successful IP-cores (i.e., a licenced CPU core) of the 1990s and 2000s.Wilson designed Acorn Replay, the video architecture for Acorn machines. This included the operating system extensions for video access as well as the codecs themselves, optimised to run high